
 Jack Torrance thought: Officious little prick.
  Ullman stood five-five, and when he moved, it was with the prissy speed that
seems to be the exclusive domain of all small plump men. The part in his hair
was exact, and his dark suit was sober but comforting. I am a man you can bring
your problems to, that suit said to the paying customer. To the hired help it
spoke more curtly: This had better be good, you. There was a red carnation in
the lapel, perhaps so that no one on the street would mistake Stuart Ullman for
the local undertaker.
  As he listened to Ullman speak, Jack admitted to himself that he probably
could not have liked any man on that side of the desk--under the circumstances.
  Ullman had asked a question he hadn't caught. That was bad; Ullman was the
type of man who would file such lapses away in a mental Rolodex for later
consideration.
  "I'm sorry?"
  "I asked if your wife fully understood what you would be taking on here. And
there's your son, of course." He glanced down at the application in front of
him. "Daniel. Your wife isn't a bit intimidated by the idea?"
  "Wendy is an extraordinary woman."
  "And your son is also extraordinary?"
  Jack smiled, a big wide PR smile. "We like to think so, I suppose. He's quite
self-reliant for a five-year-old."
  No returning smile from Ullman. He slipped Jack's application back into the
file. The file went into a drawer. The desk top was now completely bare except
for a blotter, a telephone, a Tensor lamp, and an in/out basket. Both sides of
the in/out were empty, too.
  Ullman stood up and went to the file cabinet in the corner. "Step around the
desk, if you will, Mr. Torrance. We'll look at the floor plans."
  He brought back five large sheets and set them down on the glossy walnut plain
of the desk. Jack stood by his shoulder, very much aware of the scent of
Ullman's cologne. All my men wear English Leather or they wear nothing at all
came into his mind for no reason at all, and he had to clamp his tongue between
his teeth to keep in a bray of laughter. Beyond the wall, faintly, came the
sounds of the Overlook Hotel's kitchen, gearing down from lunch.
  "Top floor," Ullman said briskly. "The attic. Absolutely nothing up there now
but bric-a-brac. The Overlook has changed hands several times since World War II
and it seems that each successive manager has put everything they don't want up
in the attic. I want rattraps and poison bait sowed around in it. Some of the
third-floor chambermaids say they have heard rustling noises. I don't believe
it, not for a moment, but there mustn't even be that one-in-a-hundred chance
that a single rat inhabits the Overlook Hotel."
  Jack, who suspected that every hotel in the world had a rat or two, held histongue.
  "Of course you wouldn't allow your son up in the attic under any
circumstances."
  "No," Jack said, and flashed the big PR smile again. Humiliating situation.
Did this officious little prick actually think he would allow his son to goof
around in a rattrap attic full of junk furniture and God knew what else?
  Ullman whisked away the attic floor plan and put it on the bottom of the pile.
  "The Overlook has one hundred and ten guest quarters," he said in a scholarly
voice. "Thirty of them, all suites, are here on the third floor. Ten in the west
wing (including the Presidential Suite), ten in the center, ten more in the east
wing. All of them command magnificent views."
  Could you at least spare the salestalk?
  But he kept quiet. He needed the job.
  Ullman put the third floor on the bottom of the pile and they studied the
second floor.
  "Forty rooms," Ullman said, "thirty doubles and ten singles. And on the first
floor, twenty of each. Plus three linen closets on each floor, and a storeroom
which is at the extreme east end of the hotel on the second floor and the
extreme west end on the first. Questions?"
  Jack shook his head. Ullman whisked the second and first floors away.
  "Now. Lobby level: Here in the center is the registration desk. Behind it are
the offices. The lobby runs for eighty feet in either direction from the desk.
Over here in the west wing is the Overlook Dining Room and the Colorado Lounge.
The banquet and ballroom facility is in the east wing. Questions?"
  "Only about the basement," Jack said. "For the winter caretaker, that's the
most important level of all. Where the action is, so to speak."
  "Watson will show you all that. The basement floor plan is on the boiler room
wall." He frowned impressively, perhaps to show that as manager, he did not
concern himself with such mundane aspects of the Overlook's operation as the
boiler and the plumbing. "Might not be a bad idea to put some traps down there
too. Just a minute. . ."
  He scrawled a note on a pad he took from his inner coat pocket (each sheet
bore the legend From the Desk of Stuart Ullman in bold black script), tore it
off, and dropped it into the out basket. It sat there looking lonesome. The pad
disappeared back into Ullman's jacket pocket like the conclusion of a magician's
trick. Now you see it, Jacky-boy, now you don't. This guy is a real heavyweight.
  They had resumed their original positions, Ullman behind the desk and Jack in
front of it, interviewer and interviewee, supplicant and reluctant patron.
Ullman folded his neat little hands on the desk blotter and looked directly at
Jack, a small, balding man in a banker's suit and a quiet gray tie. The flower
in his lapel was balanced off by a small lapel pin on the other side. It read
simply STAFF in small gold letters.
  "I'll be perfectly frank with you, Mr. Torrance. Albert Shockley is a powerful
man with a large interest in the Overlook, which showed a profit this season for
the first time in its history. Mr. Shockley also sits on the Board of Directors,
but he is not a hotel man and he would be the first to admit this. But he has
made his wishes in this caretaking matter quite obvious. He wants you hired. I
will do so. But if I had been given a free hand in this matter, I would not have
taken you on."
  Jack's hands were clenched tightly in his lap, working against each other,
sweating. Officious little prick, officious
  "I don't believe you care much for me, Mr. Torrance. I
little prick, officious--
don't care. Certainly your feelings toward me play no part in my own belief
that you are not right for the job. During the season that runs from May
fifteenth to September thirtieth, the Overlook employs one hundred and ten
people full-time; one for every room in the hotel, you might say. I don't think
many of them like me and I suspect that some of them think I'm a bit of a
bastard. They would be correct in their judgment of my character. I have to be a
bit of a bastard to run this hotel in the manner it deserves."
  He looked at Jack for comment, and Jack flashed the PR smile again, large and
insultingly toothy.
  Ullman said: "The Overlook was built in the years 1907 to 1909. The closest
town is Sidewinder, forty miles east of here over roads that are closed from
sometime in late October or November until sometime in April. A man named Robert
Townley Watson built it, the grandfather of our present maintenance man.
Vanderbilts have stayed here, and Rockefellers, and Astors, and Du Pouts. Four
Presidents have stayed in the Presidential Suite. Wilson, Harding, Roosevelt,
and Nixon."
  "I wouldn't be too proud of Harding and Nixon," Jack murmured.
  Ullman frowned but went on regardless. "It proved too much for Mr. Watson, and
he sold the hotel in 1915. It was sold again in 1922, in 1929, in 1936. It stood
vacant until the end of World War II, when it was purchased and completely
renovated by Horace Derwent, millionaire inventor, pilot, film producer, and
entrepreneur."
  "I know the name," Jack said.
  "Yes. Everything he touched seemed to turn to gold . . . except the Overlook.
He funneled over a million dollars into it before the first postwar guest ever
stepped through its doors, turning a decrepit relic into a showplace. It was
Derwent who added the roque court I saw you admiring when you arrived."
  "Roque?"
  "A British forebear of our croquet, Mr. Torrance. Croquet is bastardized
roque. According to legend, Derwent learned the game from his social secretary
and fell completely in love with it. Ours may be the finest roque court in
America."
  "I wouldn't doubt it," Jack said gravely. A roque court, a topiary full of
hedge animals out front, what next? A life-sized Uncle Wiggly game behind the
equipment shed? He was getting very tired of Mr. Stuart Ullman, but he could see
that Ullman wasn't done. Ullman was going to have his say, every last word of
it.
  "When he had lost three million, Derwent sold it to a group of California
investors. Their experience with the Overlook was equally bad. Just not hotel
people.
  "In 1970, Mr. Shockley and a group of his associates bought the hotel and
turned its management over to me. We have also run in the red for several years,
but I'm happy to say that the trust of the present owners in me has never
wavered. Last year we broke even. And this year the Overlook's accounts were
written in black ink for the first time in almost seven decades."
  Jack supposed that this fussy little man's pride was justified, and then his
original dislike washed over him again in a wave.
  He said: "I see no connection between the Overlook's admittedly colorful
history and your feeling that I'm wrong for the post, Mr. Ullman."
  "One reason that the Overlook has lost so much money lies in the depreciation
that occurs each winter. It shortens the profit margin a great deal more than
you might believe, Mr. Torrance. The winters are fantastically cruel. In order
to cope with the problem, I've installed a full-time winter caretaker to run the
boiler and to heat different parts of the hotel on a daily rotating basis. To
repair breakage as it occurs and to do repairs, so the elements can't get a
foothold. To be constantly alert to any and every contingency. During our first
winter I hired a family instead of a single man. There was a tragedy. A horrible
tragedy."
  Ullman looked at Jack coolly and appraisingly.
  "I made a mistake. I admit it freely. The man was a drunk."
  Jack felt a slow, hot grin--the total antithesis of the toothy PR grin--
stretch across his mouth. "Is that it? I'm surprised Al didn't tell you. I've
retired."
  "Yes, Mr. Shockley told me you no longer drink. He also told me about your
last job . . . your last position of trust, shall we say? You were teaching
English in a Vermont prep school. You lost your temper, I don't believe I need
to be any more specific than that. But I do happen to believe that Grady's case
has a bearing, and that is why I have brought the matter of your . . . uh,
previous history into the conversation. During the winter of 1970-71, after we
had refurbished the Overlook but before our first season, I hired this. . . this
unfortunate named Delbert Grady. He moved into the quarters you and your wife
and son will be sharing. He had a wife and two daughters. I had reservations,
the main ones being the harshness of the winter season and the fact that the
Gradys would be cut off from the outside world for five to six months."
  "But that's not really true, is it? There are telephones here, and probably a
citizen's band radio as well. And the Rocky Mountain National Park is within
helicopter range and surely a piece of ground that big must have a chopper or
two."
  "I wouldn't know about that," Ullman said. "The hotel does have a two-way
radio that Mr. Watson will show you, along with a list of the correct
frequencies to broadcast on if you need help. The telephone lines between here
and Sidewinder are still aboveground, and they go down almost every winter at
some point or other and are apt to stay down for three weeks to a month and a
half. There is a snowmobile in the equipment shed also."
  "Then the place really isn't cut off."
  Mr. Ullman looked pained. "Suppose your son or your wife tripped on the stairs
and fractured his or her skull, Mr. Torrance. Would you think the place was cut
off then?"
  Jack saw the point. A snowmobile running at top speed could get you down to
Sidewinder in an hour and a half . . . maybe. A helicopter from the Parks Rescue
Service could get up here in three hours . . . under optimum conditions. In a
blizzard it would never even be able to lift off and you couldn't hope to run a
snowmobile at top speed, even if you dared take a seriously injured person out
into temperatures that might be twenty-five below-or forty-five below, if you
added in the wind chill factor.
  "In the case of Grady," Ullman said, "I reasoned much as Mr. Shockley seems to
have done in your case. Solitude can be damaging in itself. Better for the man
to have his family with him. If there was trouble, I thought, the odds were very
high that it would be something less urgent than a fractured skull or an
accident with one of the power tools or some sort of convulsion. A serious case
of the flu, pneumonia, a broken arm, even appendicitis. Any of those things
would have left enough time.
  "I suspect that what happened came as a result of too much cheap whiskey, of
which Grady had laid in a generous supply, unbeknownst to me, and a curious
condition which the old-timers call cabin fever. Do you know the term?" Ullman
offered a patronizing little smile, ready to explain as soon as Jack admitted
his ignorance, and Jack was happy to respond quickly and crisply.
  "It's a slang term for the claustrophobic reaction that can occur when people
are shut in together over long periods of time. The feeling of claustrophobia is
externalized as dislike for the people you happen to be shut in with. In extreme
cases it can result in hallucinations and violence--murder has been done over
such minor things as a burned meal or an argument about whose turn it is to do
the dishes."
  Ullman looked rather nonplussed, which did Jack a world of good. He decided to
press a little further, but silently promised Wendy he would stay cool.
  "I suspect you did make a mistake at that. Did he hurt them?"
  "He killed them, Mr. Torrance, and then committed suicide. He murdered the
little girls with a hatchet, his wife with a shotgun, and himself the same way.
His leg was broken. Undoubtedly so drunk he fell downstairs."
  Ullman spread his hands and looked at Jack self-righteously.
  "Was he a high school graduate?"
  "As a matter of fact, he wasn't," Ullman said a little stiffly. "I thought a,
shall we say, less imaginative individual would be less susceptible to the
rigors, the loneliness--"
  "That was your mistake," Jack said. "A stupid man is more prone to cabin fever
just as he's more prone to shoot someone over a card game or commit a spur-of-
the-moment robbery. He gets bored. When the snow comes, there's nothing to do
but watch TV or play solitaire and cheat when he can't get all the aces out.
Nothing to do but bitch at his wife and nag at the kids and drink. It gets hard
to sleep because there's nothing to hear. So he drinks himself to sleep and
wakes up with a hangover. He gets edgy. And maybe the telephone goes out and the
TV aerial blows down and there's nothing to do but think and cheat at solitaire
and get edgier and edgier. Finally. . . boom, boom, boom."
  "Whereas a more educated man, such as yourself?"
  "My wife and I both like to read. I have a play to work on, as Al Shockley
probably told you. Danny has his puzzles, his coloring books, and his crystal
radio. I plan to teach him to read, and I also want to teach him to snowshoe.
Wendy would like to learn how, too. Oh yes, I think we can keep busy and out of
each other's hair if the TV goes on the fritz." He paused. "And Al was telling
the truth when he told you I no longer drink. I did once, and it got to be
serious. But I haven't had so much as a glass of beer in the last fourteen
months. I don't intend to bring any alcohol up here, and I don't think there
will be an opportunity to get arty after the snow flies."
  "In that you would be quite correct," Ullman said. "But as long as the three
of you are up here, the potential for problems is multiplied. I have told Mr.
Shockley this, and he told me he would take the responsibility. Now I've told
you, and apparently you are also willing to take the responsibility--"
  "I am."
  "All right. I'll accept that, since I have little choice. But I would still
rather have an unattached college boy taking a year off. Well, perhaps you'll
do. Now I'll turn you over to Mr. Watson, who will take you through the basement
and around the grounds. Unless you have further questions?"
  "No. None at all."
  Ullman stood. "I hope there are no hard feelings, Mr. Torrance. There is
nothing personal in the things I have said to you. I only want what's best for
the Overlook. It is a great hotel. I want it to stay that way."
  "No. No hard feelings." Jack flashed the PR grin again, but he was glad Ullman
didn't offer to shake hands. There were hard feelings. All kinds of them.


  Jack parked the VW in front of the Rexall in the Table Mesa shopping center
and let the engine die. He wondered again if he shouldn't go ahead and get the
fuel pump replaced, and told himself again that they couldn't afford it. If the
little car could keep running until November, it could retire with full honors
anyway. By November the snow up there in the mountains would be higher than the
beetle's roof . . . maybe higher than three beetles stacked on top of each
other.
  "Want you to stay in the car, doe. I'll bring you a candy bar."
  "Why can't I come in?"
  "I have to make a phone call. It's private stuff."
  "Is that why you didn't make it at home?"
  "Check."
  Wendy had insisted on a phone in spite of their unraveling finances. She had
argued that with a small child--especially a boy like Danny, who sometimes
suffered from fainting spells--they couldn't afford not to have one. So Jack had
forked over the thirty-dollar installation fee, bad enough, and a ninety-dollar
security deposit, which really hurt. And so far the phone had been mute except
for two wrong numbers.
  "Can I have a Baby Ruth, Daddy?"
  "Yes. You sit still and don't play with the gearshift, right?"
  "Right. I'll look at the maps."

  "You do that."
  As Jack got out, Danny opened the bug's glovebox and took out the five
battered gas station maps: Colorado, Nebraska, Utah, Wyoming, New Mexico. He
loved road maps, loved to trace where the roads went with his finger. As far as
he was concerned, new maps were the best part of moving West.
  Jack went to the drugstore counter, got Danny's candy bar, and newspaper, and
a copy of the October Writer's Digest. He gave the girl a five and asked for his
change in quarters. With the silver in his hand he walked over to the telephone
booth by the keymaking machine and slipped inside. From here he could see Danny
in the bug through three sets of glass. The boy's head was bent studiously over
his maps. Jack felt a wave of nearly desperate love for the boy. The emotion
showed on his face as a stony grimness.
  He supposed he could have made his obligatory thank-you call to Al from home;
he certainly wasn't going to say anything Wendy would object to. It was his
pride that said no. These days he almost always listened to what his pride told
him to do, because along with his wife and son, six hundred dollars in a
checking account, and one weary 1968 Volkswagen, his pride was all that was
left. The only thing that was his. Even the checking account was joint. A year
ago he had been teaching English in one of the finest prep schools in New
England. There had been friends--although not exactly the same ones he'd had
before going on the wagon--some laughs, fellow faculty members who admired his
deft touch in the classroom and his private dedication to writing. Things had
been very good six months ago. All at once there was enough money left over at
the end of each two-week pay period to start a little savings account. In his
drinking days there had never been a penny left over, even though Al Shockley
had stood a great many of the rounds. He and Wendy had begun to talk cautiously
about finding a house and making a down payment in a year or so. A farmhouse in
the country, take six or eight years to renovate it completely, what the hell,
they were young, they had time.
  Then he had lost his temper.
  George Hatfield.
  The smell of hope had turned to the smell of old leather in Crommert's office,
the whole thing like some scene from his own play: the old prints of previous
Stovington headmasters on the walls, steel engravings of the school as it had
been in 1879, when it was first built, and in 1895, when Vanderbilt money had
enabled them to build the field house that still stood at the west end of the
soccer field, squat, immense, dressed in ivy. April ivy had been rustling
outside Crommert's slit window and the drowsy sound of steam heat came from the
radiator. It was no set, he remembered thinking. It was real. His life. How
could he have fucked it up so badly?
  "This is a serious situation, Jack. Terribly serious. The Board has asked me
to convey its decision to you."
  The Board wanted lack's resignation and Jack had given it to them. Under
different circumstances, he would have gotten tenure that June.
  What had followed that interview in Crommert's office had been the darkest,
most dreadful night of his life. The wanting, the needing to get drunk had never
been so bad. His hands shook. He knocked things over. And he kept wanting to
take it out on Wendy and Danny. His temper was like a vicious animal on a frayed
leash. He had left the house in terror that he might strike them. Had ended up
outside a bar, and the only thing that had kept him from going in was the
knowledge that if he did, Wendy would leave him at last, and take Danny with
her. He would be dead from the day they left.
  Instead of going into the bar, where dark shadows sat sampling the tasty
waters of oblivion, he had gone to Al Shockley's house. The Board's vote had
been six to one. Al had been the one.
  Now he dialed the operator and she told him that for a dollar eighty-five he
could be put in touch with Al two thousand miles away for three minutes. Time is
relative, baby, he thought, and stuck in eight quarters. Faintly he could hear
the electronic boops and beeps of his connection sniffing its way eastward.
  Al's father had been Arthur Longley Shockley, the steel baron. He had left his
only son, Albert, a fortune and a huge range of investments and directorships
and chairs on various boards. One of these had been on the Board of Directors
for Stovington Preparatory Academy, the old man's favorite charity. Both Arthur
and Albert Shockley were alumni and Al lived in Barre, close enough to take a
personal interest in the school's affairs. For several years Al had been
Stovington's tennis coach.
  Jack and Al had become friends in a completely natural and uncoincidental way:
at the many school and faculty functions they attended together, they were
always the two drunkest people there. Shockley was separated from his wife, and
Jack's own marriage was skidding slowly downhill, although he still loved Wendy
and had promised sincerely (and frequently) to reform, for her sake and for baby
Danny's.
  The two of them went on from many faculty parties, hitting the bars until they
closed, then stopping at some mom 'n' pot) store for a case of beer they would
drink parked at the end of some back road. There were mornings when Jack would
stumble into their leased house with dawn seeping into the sky and find Wendy
and the baby asleep on the couch, Danny always on the inside, a tiny fist curled
under the shelf of Wendy's jaw. He would look at them and the self-loathing
would back up his throat in a bitter wave, even stronger than the taste of beer
and cigarettes and martinis--martians, as Al called them. Those were the times
that his mind would turn thoughtfully and sanely to the gun or the rope or the
razor blade.
  If the bender had occurred on a weeknight, he would sleep for three hours, get
up, dress, chew four Excedrins, and go off to teach his nine o'clock American
Poets still drunk. Good morning, kids, today the Red-Eyed Wonder is going to
tell you about how Longfellow lost his wife in the big fire.
  He hadn't believed he was an alcoholic, Jack thought as Al's telephone began
ringing in his ear. The classes he had missed or taught unshaven, still reeking
of last night's martians. Not me, I can stop anytime. The nights he and Wendy
had passed in separate beds. Listen, I'm fine. Mashed fenders. Sure I'm okay to
drive. The tears she always shed in the bathroom. Cautious looks from his
colleagues at any party where alcohol was served, even wine. The slowly dawning
realization that he was being talked about. The knowledge that he was producing
nothing at his Underwood but balls of mostly blank paper that ended up in the
wastebasket. He had been something of a catch for Stovington, a slowly blooming
American writer perhaps, and certainly a man well qualified to teach that great
mystery, creative writing. He had published two dozen short stories. He was
working on a play, and thought there might be a novel incubating in some mental
back room. But now he was not producing and his teaching had become erratic.
  It had finally ended one night less than a month after Jack had broken his
son's arm. That, it seemed to him, had ended his marriage. All that remained was
for Wendy to gather her will . . . if her mother hadn't been such a grade A
bitch, he knew, Wendy would have taken a bus back to New Hampshire as soon as
Danny had been okay to travel. It was over.
  It had been a little past midnight. Jack and Al were coming into Barre on U.S.
31, Al behind the wheel of his Jag, shifting fancily on the curves, sometimes
crossing the double yellow line. They were both very drunk; the martians had
landed that night in force. They came around the last curve before the bridge at
seventy, and there was a kid's bike in the road, and then the sharp, hurt
squealing as rubber shredded from the Jag's tires, and Jack remembered seeing
Al's face looming over the steering wheel like a round white moon. Then the
jingling crashing sound as they hit the bike at forty, and it had flown up like
a bent and twisted bird, the handlebars striking the windshield, and then it was
in the air again, leaving the starred safety glass in front of Jack's bulging
eyes. A moment later he heard the final dreadful smash as it landed on the road
behind them. Something thumped underneath them as the tires passed over it. The
Jag drifted around broadside, Al still jockeying the wheel, and from far away
Jack heard himself saying: "Jesus, Al. We ran him down. I felt it."
  In his ear the phone kept ringing. Come on, Al. Be home. Let me get this over
with.
  Al had brought the car to a smoking halt not more than three feet from a
bridge stanchion. Two of the Jag's tires were flat. They had left zigzagging
loops of burned rubber for a hundred and thirty feet. They looked at each other
for a moment and then ran back in the cold darkness.
  The bike was completely ruined. One wheel was gone, and looking back over his
shoulder Al had seen it lying in the middle of the road, half a dozen spokes
sticking up like piano wire. Al had said hesitantly: "I think that's what we ran
over, Tacky-boy."
  "Then where's the kid?"
  "Did you see a kid?"
  Jack frowned. It had all happened with such crazy speed. Coming around the
corner. The bike looming in the Jag's headlights. Al yelling something. Then the
collision and the long skid.
  They moved the bike to one shoulder of the road. Al went back to the Jag and
put on its four-way flashers. For the next two hours they searched the sides of
the road, using a powerful four-cell flashlight. Nothing. Although it was late,
several cars passed the beached Jaguar and the two men with the bobbing
flashlight. None of them stopped. Jack thought later that some queer providence,
bent on giving them both a last chance, had kept the cops away, had kept any of
the passersby from calling them.
  At quarter past two they returned to the Jag, sober but queasy. "If there was
nobody riding it, what was it doing in the middle of the road?" Al demanded. "It
wasn't parked on the side; it was right in the fucking middle!"
  Jack could only shake his head.
  "Your party does not answer," the operator said. "Would you like me to keep on
trying?"
  "A couple more rings, operator. Do you mind?"
  "No, sir," the voice said dutifully.
  Come on, Al!
  Al had hiked across the bridge to the nearest pay phone, called a bachelor
friend and told him it would be worth fifty dollars if the friend would get the
Jag's snow tires out of the garage and bring them down to the Highway 31 bridge
outside of Barre. The friend showed up twenty minutes later, wearing a pair of
jeans and his pajama top. He surveyed the scene.
  "Kill anybody?" he asked.
  Al was already jacking up the back of the car and Jack was loosening lug nuts.
"Providentially, no one," Al said.
  "I think I'll just head on back anyway. Pay me in the morning."
  "Fine," Al said without looking up.
  The two of them had gotten the tires on without incident, and together they
drove back to AI Shockley's house. Al put the Jag in the garage and killed the
motor.
  In the dark quiet he said: "I'm off drinking, Jacky-boy. It's all over. I've
slain my last martian."
  And now, sweating in this phonebootb, it occurred to lack that he had never
doubted Al's ability to carry through. He had driven back to his own house in
the VW with the radio turned up, and some disco group chanted over and over
again, talismanic in the house before dawn: Do it anyway . . . you wanta do it .
. . do it anyway you want . . . No matter how loud he heard the squealing tires,
the crash. When he blinked his eyes shut, he saw that single crushed wheel with
its broken spokes pointing at the sky.
  When he got in, Wendy was asleep on the couch. He looked in Danny's room and
Danny was in his crib on his back, sleeping deeply, his arm still buried in the
cast. In the softly filtered glow from the streetlight outside he could see the
dark lines on its plastered whiteness where all the doctors and nurses in
pediatrics had signed it.
  It was an accident. He fell down the stairs.
  (o you dirty liar)
  It was an accident. l lost my temper.
  (you fucking drunken waste god wiped snot out of his nose and that was you)
  Listen, hey, come on, please, just an accident--
  But the last plea was driven away by the image of that bobbing flashlight as
they hunted through the dry late November weeds, looking for the sprawled body
that by all good rights should have been there, waiting for the police. It
didn't matter that Al had been driving. There had been other nights when he had
been driving.
  He pulled the covers up over Danny, went into their bedroom, and took the
Spanish Llama .38 down from the top shelf of the closet. It was in a shoe box.
He sat on the bed with it for nearly an hour, looking at it, fascinated by its
deadly shine.
  It was dawn when he put it back in the box and put the box back in the closet.
  That morning he had called Bruckner, the department head, and told him to
please post his classes. He had the flu. Bruckner agreed, with less good grace
than was common. Jack Torrance had been extremely susceptible to the flu in the
last year.
  Wendy made him scrambled eggs and coffee. They ate in silence. The only sound
came from the back yard, where Danny was gleefully running his trucks across the
sand pile with his good hand.
  She went to do the dishes. Her back to him, she said: "Jack. I've been
thinking."
  "Have you?" He lit a cigarette with trembling hands. No hangover this morning,
oddly enough. Only the shakes. He blinked. In the instant's darkness the bike
flew up against the windshield, starring the glass. The tires shrieked. The
flashlight bobbed.
  "I want to talk to you about . . . about what's best for me and Danny. For you
too, maybe. I don't know. We should have talked about it before, I guess."
  "Would you do something for me?" he asked, looking at the wavering tip of his
cigarette. "Would you do me a favor?"
  "What?" Her voice was dull and neutral. He looked at her back.
  "Let's talk about it a week from today. If you still want to..,
  Now she turned to him, her hands lacy with suds, her pretty face pale and
disillusioned. "Jack, promises don't work with you. You just go right on with--"
  She stopped, looking in his eyes, fascinated, suddenly uncertain.
  "In a week," he said. His voice had lost all its strength and dropped to a
whisper. "Please. I'm not promising anything. If you still want to talk then,
we'll talk. About anything you want."
  They looked across the sunny kitchen at each other for a long time, and when
she turned back to the dishes without saying anything more, he began to shudder.
God, he needed a drink. Just a little pick-me-up to put things in their true
perspective--
  "Danny said he dreamed you had a car accident," she said abruptly. "He has
funny dreams sometimes. He said it this morning, when I got him dressed. Did
you, Jack? Did you have an accident?"
  "No."
  By noon the craving for a drink had become a low-grade fever. He went to Al's.
  "You dry?" Al asked before letting him in. Al looked horrible.
  "Bone dry. You look like Lon Chaney in Phantom of the Opera."
  "Come on in."
  They played two-handed whist all afternoon. They didn't drink.
  A week passed. He and Wendy didn't speak much. But he knew she was watching,
not believing. He drank coffee black and endless cans of Coca-Cola. One night he
drank a whole six-pack of Coke and then ran into the bathroom and vomited it up.
The level of the bottles in the liquor cabinet did not go down. After his
classes he went over to Al Shockley's-she hated Al Shockley worse than she had
ever hated anyone-and when he came home she would swear she smelled scotch or
gin on his breath, but he would talk lucidly to her before supper, drink coffee,
play with Danny after supper, sharing a Coke with him, read him a bedtime story,
then sit and correct themes with cup after cup of black coffee by his hand, and
she would have to admit to herself that she had been wrong.
  Weeks passed and the unspoken word retreated further from the back of her
lips. Jack sensed its retirement but knew it would never retire completely.
Things began to get a little easier. Then George Hatfield. He had lost his
temper again, this time stone sober.
  "Sir, your party still doesn't--"
  "Hello?" Al's voice, out of breath.
  "Go ahead," the operator said dourly.
  "Al, this is Jack Torrance."
  "Jacky-boy!" Genuine pleasure. "How are you?"
  "Good. I just called to say thanks. I got the job. It's perfect. If I can't
finish that goddam play snowed in all winter, I'll never finish it."
  "You'll finish."
  "How are things?" Jack asked hesitantly.
  "Dry," Al responded. "You?"
  "As a bone."
  "Miss it much?"
  "Every day."
  Al laughed. "I know that scene. But I don't know how you stayed dry after that
Hatfield thing, Jack. That was above and beyond."

 "I really bitched things up for myself," he said evenly.
 "Oh, hell. I'll have the Board around by spring. Effinger's already saying
they might have been too hasty. And if that play comes to something--"
 "Yes. Listen, my boy's out in the car, Al. He looks like he might be getting
restless--"
 "Sure. Understand. You have a good winter up there, Jack. Glad to help."
 "Thanks again, Al." He hung up, closed his eyes in the hot booth, and again
saw the crashing bike, the bobbing flashlight. There had been a squib in the
paper the next day, no more than a space-filler really, but the owner had not
been named. Why it had been out there in the night would always be a mystery to
them, and perhaps that was as it should be.
 He went back out to the car and gave Danny his slightly melted Baby Ruth.
 "Daddy?"
 "What, doc?"
 Danny hesitated, looking at his father's abstracted face.
 "When I was waiting for you to come back from that hotel, I had a bad dream.
Do you remember? When I fell asleep?"
 "Um-hm."
 But it was no good. Daddy's mind was someplace else, not with him. Thinking
about the Bad Thing again.
 (I dreamed that you hurt me, Daddy)
 "What was the dream, doc?"
 "Nothing," Danny said as they pulled out into the parking lot. He put the maps
back into the glove compartment.
 "You sure?"
 "Yes."
 Jack gave his son a faint, troubled glance; and then his mind turned to his
play.

  There were four bags in a pile just outside the door. Three of them were
giant, battered old suitcases covered with black imitation alligator hide. The
last was an oversized zipper bag with a faded tartan skin.
  "Guess you can handle that one, can't you?" Hallorann asked him. He picked up
two of the big cases in one hand and hoisted the other under his arm.
  "Sure," Danny said. He got a grip on it with both hands and followed the cook
down the porch steps, trying manfully not to grunt and give away how heavy it
was.
  A sharp and cutting fall wind had come up since they had arrived; it whistled
across the parking lot, making Danny wince his eyes down to slits as he carried
the zipper bag in front of him, bumping on his knees. A few errant aspen leaves
rattled and turned across the now mostly deserted asphalt, making Danny think
momentarily of that night last week when he had wakened out of his nightmare and
had heard-or thought he heard, at least-Tony telling him not to go.
  Hallorann set his bags down by the trunk of a beige Plymouth Fury. "This ain't
much car," he confided to Danny, "just a rental job. My Bessie's on the other
end. She's a car. 1950 Cadillac, and does she run sweet? I'll tell the world. I
keep her in Florida because she's too old for all this mountain climbing. You
need a hand with that?"
  "No, sir," Danny said. He managed to carry it the last ten or twelve steps
without grunting and set it down with a large sigh of relief.
  "Good boy," Hallorann said. He produced a large key ring from the pocket of
his blue serge jacket and unlocked the trunk. As he lifted the bags in he said:
"You shine on, boy. Harder than anyone I ever met in my life. And I'm sixty
years old this January."
  "Huh?"
  "You got a knack," Hallorann said, turning to him. "Me, I've always called it
shining. That's what my grandmother called it, too. She had it. We used to sit
in the kitchen when I was a boy no older than you and have long talks without
even openin our mouths."
  "Really?"
  Hallorann smiled at Danny's openmouthed, almost hungry expression and said,
"Come on up and sit in the car with me for a few minutes. Want to talk to you."
He slammed the trunk.
  In the lobby of the Overlook, Wendy Torrance saw her son get into the
passenger side of Hallorann's car as the big black cook slid in behind the
wheel. A sharp pang of fear struck her and she opened her mouth to tell Jack

that Hallorann had not been lying about taking their son to Florida-there was a
kidnaping afoot. But they were only sitting there. She could barely see the
small silhouette of her son's head, turned attentively toward Hallorann's big
one. Even at this distance that small head had a set to it that she recognized-
it was the way her son looked when there was something on the TV that
particularly fascinated him, or when he and his father were playing old maid or
idiot cribbage. Jack, who was still looking around for Ullman, hadn't noticed.
Wendy kept silent, watching Hallorann's car nervously, wondering what they could
possibly be talking about that would make Danny cock -his head that way.
  In the car Hallorann was saying: "Get you kinda lonely, thinkin you were the
only one?"
  Danny, who had been frightened as well as lonely sometimes, nodded. "Am I the
only one you ever met?" he asked.
  Hallorann laughed and shook his head. "No, child, no. But you shine the
hardest."
  "Are there lots, then?"
  "No," Hallorann said, "but you do run across them. A lot of folks, they got a
little bit of shine to them. They don't oven know it. But they always seem to
show up with flowers when their wives are feelin blue with the monthlies, they
do good on school tests they don't even study for, they got a good idea how
people are feelin as soon as they walk into a room. I come across fifty or sixty
like that. But maybe only a dozen, countin my gram, that knew they was shinin."
  "Wow," Danny said, and thought about it. Then: "Do you know Mrs. Brant?"
  "Her?" Hallorann asked scornfully. "She don't shine. Just sends her supper
back two-three times every night."
  "I know she doesn't," Danny said earnestly. "But do you know the man in the
gray uniform that gets the cars?"
  "Mike? Sure, I know Mike. What about him?"
  "Mr. Hallorann, why would she want his pants?"
  "What are you talking about, boy?"
  "Well, when she was watching him, she was thinking she would sure like to get
into his pants and I just wondered why-"
  But he got no further. Hallorann had thrown his head back, and rich, dark
laughter issued from his chest, rolling around in the car like cannonfire. The
seat shook with the force of it. Danny smiled, puzzled, and at last the storm
subsided by fits and starts. Hallorann produced a large silk handkerchief from
his breast pocket like a white flag of surrender and wiped his streaming eyes.
  "Boy," he said, still snorting a little, "you are gonna know everything there
is to know about the human condition before you make ten. I dunno if to envy you
or not."
  "But Mrs. Brant--"
  "You never mind her," he said. "And don't go askin your mom, either. You'd
only upset her, dig what I'm sayin?"
  "Yes, sir," Danny said. He dug it perfectly well. He had upset his mother that
way in the past.
  "That Mrs. Brant is just a dirty old woman with an itch, that's all you have
to know." He looked at Danny speculatively. "How hard can you hit, doc?"
  "Huh?"
  "Give me a blast. Think at me. I want to know if you got as much as I think
you do."
  "What do you want me to think?"
  "Anything. Just think it hard."
  "Okay," Danny said. He considered it for a moment, then gathered his
concentration and flung it out at Hallorann. He had never done anything
precisely like this before, and at the last instant some instinctive part of him
rose up and blunted some of the thought's raw force-he didn't want to hurt Mr.
Hallorann. Still the thought arrowed out of him with a force he never would have
believed. It went like a Nolan Ryan fastball with a little extra on it.
  (Gee I hope I don't hurt him)
  And the thought was:
                     (!!! HI, DICK!!!)
  Hallorann winced and jerked bac kward on the seat. His teeth came together
with a hard click, drawing blood from his lower lip in a thin trickle. His hands
flew up involuntarily from his lap to the level of his chest and then settled
back again. For a moment his eyelids fluttered limply, with no conscious
control, and Danny was frightened.
  "Mr. Hallorann? Dick? Are you okay?"
  "I don't know," Hallorann said, and laughed weakly. "I honest to God don't. My
God, boy, you're a pistol."
  "I'm sorry," Danny said, more alarmed. "Should I get my daddy? I'll run and
get him."
  "No, here I come. I'm okay, Danny. You just sit right there. I feel a little
scrambled, that's all."
  "I didn't go as hard as I could," Danny confessed. "I was scared to, at the
last minute."
  "Probably my good luck you did . . . my brains would be leakin out my ears."
He saw the alarm on Danny's face and smiled. "No harm done. What did it feel
like to you?"
  "Like I was Nolan Ryan throwing a fastball," he replied promptly.
  "You like baseball, do you?" Hallorann was rubbing his temples gingerly.
  "Daddy and me like the Angels," Danny said. "The Red Sox in the American
League East and the Angels in the West. We saw the Red Sox against Cincinnati in
the World Series. I was a lot littler then. And Daddy was . . ." Danny's face
went dark and troubled.
  "Was what, Dan?"
  "I forget," Danny said. He started to put his thumb in his mouth to suck it,
but that was a baby trick. He put his hand back in his lap.
  "Can you tell what your mom and dad are thinking, Danny?" Hallorann was
watching him closely.
  "Most times, if I want to. But usually I don't try."
  "Why not?"
  "Well . . ." he paused a moment, troubled. "It would be like peeking into the
bedroom and watching while they're doing the thing that makes babies. Do you
know that thing?"
  "I have had acquaintance with it," Hallorann said gravely.
  "They wouldn't like that. And they wouldn't like me peeking at their thinks.
It would be dirty."
  "I see."
  "But I know how they're feeling," Danny said. "I can't help that. I know how
you're feeling, too. I hurt you. I'm sorry."
  "It's just a headache. I've had hangovers that were worse. Can you read other
people, Danny?"
  "I can't read yet at all," Danny said, "except a few words. But Daddy's going
to teach me this winter. My daddy used to teach reading and writing in a big
school. Mostly writing, but he knows reading, too."
  "I mean, can you tell what anybody is thinking?"
  Danny thought about it.
  "I can if it's loud," he said finally. "Like Mrs. Brant and the pants. Or like
once, when me and Mommy were in this big store to get me some shoes, there was
this big kid looking at radios, and he was thinking about taking one without
buying it. Then he'd think, what if I get caught? Then he'd think, I really want
it. Then he'd think about getting caught again. He was making himself sick about
it, and he was making me sick. Mommy was talking to the man who sells the shoes
so I went over and said, `Kid, don't take that radio. Go away.' And he got
really scared. He went away fast."
  Hallorann was grinning broadly. "I bet he did. Can you do anything else,
Danny? Is it only thoughts and feelings, or is there more?"
  Cautiously: "Is there more for you?"
  "Sometimes," Hallorann said. "Not often. Sometimes . . . sometimes there are
dreams. Do you dream, Danny?"
  "Sometimes," Danny said, "I dream when I'm awake. After Tony comes." His thumb
wanted to go into his mouth again. He had never told anyone but Mommy and Daddy
about Tony. He made his thumb-sucking hand go back into his lap.
  "Who's Tony?"
  And suddenly Danny had one of those flashes of understanding that frightened
him most of all; it was like a sudden glimpse of some incomprehensible machine
that might be safe or might be deadly dangerous. He was too young to know which.
He was too young to understand.
  "What's wrong?" he cried. "You're asking me all this because you're worried,

aren't you? Why are you worried about me? Why are you worried about us?"
  Hallorann put his large dark hands on the small boy's shoulders. "Stop," he
said. It's probably nothin. But if it is somethin . . . well, you've got a large
thing in your head, Danny. You'll have to do a lot of growin yet before you
catch up to it, I guess. You got to be brave about it."
  "But I don't understand thingsl" Danny burst out. "I do but I don't! People .
. . they feel things and I feel them, but I don't know what I'm feeling!" He
looked down at his lap wretchedly. "I wish I could read. Sometimes Tony shows me
signs and I can hardly read any of them."
  "Who's Tony?" Hallorann asked again.
  "Mommy and Daddy call him my `invisible playmate,"' Danny said, reciting the
words carefully. "But he's really real. At least, I think he is. Sometimes, when
I try real hard to understand things, he comes. He says, 'Danny, I want to show
you something.' And it's like I pass out. Only . . . there are dreams, like you
said." He looked at Hallorann and swallowed. "They used to be nice. But now . .
. I can't remember the word for dreams that scare you and make you cry."
  "Nightmares?" Hallorann asked.
  "Yes. That's right. Nightmares."
  "About this place? About the Overlook?"
  Danny looked down at his thumb-sucking hand again. "Yes," he whispered. Then
he spoke shrilly, looking up into Hallorann's face: "But I can't tell my daddy,
and you can't, either! He has to have this job because it's the only one Uncle
Al could get for him and he has to finish his play or he might start doing the
Bad Thing again and I know what that is, it's getting drunk, that's what it is,
it's when he used to always be drunk and that was a Bad Thing to do!" He
stopped, on the verge of tears.
  "Shh," Hallorann said, and pulled Danny's face against the rough serge of his
jacket. It smelled faintly of mothballs. "That's all right, son. And if that
thumb likes your mouth, let it go where it wants." But his face was troubled.
  He said: "What you got, son, I call it shinin on, the Bible calls it having
visions, and there's scientists that call it precognition. I've read up on it,
son. I've studied on it. They all mean seeing the future. Do you understand
that?"
  Danny nodded against Hallorann's coat.
  "I remember the strongest shine I ever had that way . . . I'm not liable to
forget. It was 1955. I was still in the Army then, stationed overseas in West
Germany. It was an hour before supper, and I was standin by the sink, givin one
of the KPs hell for takin too much of the potato along with the peel. I says,
'Here, lemme show you how that's done.' He held out the potato and the peeler
and then the whole kitchen was gone. Bang, just like that. You say you see this
guy Tony before . . . before you have dreams?"
  Danny nodded.
  Hallorann put an arm around him. "With me it's smellin oranges. All that

afternoon I'd been smellin them and thinkin nothin of it, because they were on
the menu for that nightwe had thirty crates of Valencias. Everybody in the damn
kitchen was smellin oranges that night.
  "For a minute it was like I had just passed out. And then I heard an explosion
and saw flames. There were people screaming. Sirens. And I heard this hissin
noise that could only be steam. Then it seemed like I got a little closer to
whatever it was and I saw a railroad car off the tracks and laying on its side
with Georgia aced South Carolina Railroad written on it, and I knew like a flash
that my brother Carl was on that train and it jumped the tracks and Carl was
dead. Just like that. Then it was gone and here's this scared, stupid little KP
in front of me, still holdin out that potato and the peeler. He says, 'Are you
okay, Sarge?' And I says, `No. My brother's just been killed down in Georgia'
And when I finally got my momma on the overseas telephone, she told me how it
was.
  "But see, boy, I already knew how it was."
  He shook his head slowly, as if dismissing the memory, and looked down at the
wide-eyed boy.
  "But the thing you got to remember, my boy, is this: Those things don't always
come true. I remember just four years ago I had a job cookin at a boys' camp up
in Maine on Long Lake. So I am sittin by the boarding gate at Logan Airport in
Boston, just waiting to get on my flight, and I start to smell oranges. For the
first time in maybe five years. So I say to myself, 'My God, what's comin on
this crazy late show now?' and I got down to the bathroom and sat on one of the
toilets to be private. I never did black out, but I started to get this feelin,
stronger and stronger, that my plane was gonna crash. Then the feeling went
away, and the smell of oranges, and I knew it was over. I went back to the Delta
Airlines desk and changed my flight to one three hours later. And do you know
what happened?"
  "What?" Danny whispered.
  "Nothin!" Hallorann said, and laughed. He was relieved to see the boy smile a
little, too. "Not one single thingl That old plane landed right on time and
without a single bump or bruise. So you see . . . sometimes those feelins don't
come to anything."
  "Oh," Danny said.
  "Or you take the race track. I go a lot, and I usually do pretty well. I stand
by the rail when they go by the starting gate, and sometimes I get a little
shine about this horse or that one. Usually those feelins help me get real well.
I always tell myself that someday I'm gonna get three at once on three long
shots and make enough on the trifecta to retire early. It ain't happened yet.
But there's plenty of times I've come home from the track on shank's mare
instead of in a taxicab with my wallet swollen up. Nobody shines on all the
time, except maybe for God up in heaven."
  "Yes, sir," Danny said, thinking of the time almost a year ago when Tony had

showed him a new baby lying in a crib at their house in Stovington. He had been
very excited about that, and had waited, knowing that it took time, but there
had been no new baby.
  "Now you listen," Hallorann said, and took both of Danny's hands in his own.
"I've had some bad dreams here, and I've had some bad feelins. I've worked here
two seasons now and maybe a dozen times I've had . . . well, nightmares. And
maybe half a dozen times I've thought I've seen things. No, I won't say what. It
ain't for a little boy like you. Just nasty things. Once it had something to do
with those damn hedges clipped to look like animals. Another time there was a
maid, Delores Vickery her name was, and she had a little shine to her, but I
don't think she knew it. Mr. Ullman fired her . . . do you know what that is,
doc?"
  "Yes, sir," Danny said candidly, "my daddy got fired from his teaching job and
that's why we're in Colorado, I guess."
  "Well, Ullman fired her on account of her saying she'd seen something in one
of the rooms where . . . well, where a bad thing happened. That was in Room 217,
and I want you to promise me you won't go in there, Danny. Not all winter. Steer
right clear."
  "All right," Danny said. "Did the lady--the maiden--did she ask you to go
look?"
  "Yes, she did. And there was a bad thing there. But . . . I don't think it was
a bad thing that could hurt anyone, Danny, that's what I'm tryin to say. People
who shine can sometimes see things that are gonna happen, and I think sometimes
they can see things that did happen. But they're just like pictures in a book.
Did you ever see a picture in a book that scared you, Danny?"
  "Yes," he said, thinking of the story of Bluebeard and the picture where
Bluebeard's new wife opens the door and sees all the heads.
  "But you knew it couldn't hurt you, didn't you?"
  "Ye--ess. . ." Danny said, a little dubious.
  "Well, that's how it is in this hotel. I don't know why, but it seems that all
the bad things that ever happened here, there's little pieces of those things
still layin around like fingernail clippins or the boogers that somebody nasty
just wiped under a chair. I don't know why it should just be here, there's bad
goings-on in just about every hotel in the world, I guess, and I've worked in a
lot of them and had no trouble. Only here. But Danny, I don't think those things
can hurt anybody." He emphasized each word in the sentence with a mild shake of
the boy's shoulders. "So if you should see something, in a hallway or a room or
outside by those hedges . . . just look the other way and when you look back,
it'll be gone. Are you diggin me?"
  "Yes," Danny said. He felt much better, soothed. He got up on his knees,
kissed Hallorann's cheek, and gave him a big hard hug. Hallorann hugged him
back.
  When he released the boy he asked: "Your folks, they don't shine, do they?"

  "No, I don't think so."
  "I tried them like I did you," Hallorann said. "Your momma jumped the tiniest
bit. I think all mothers shine a little, you know, at least until their kids
grow up enough to watch out for themselves. Your dad . . ."
  Hallorann paused momentarily. He had probed at the boy's father and he just
didn't know. It wasn't like meeting someone who had the shine, or someone who
definitely did not. Poking at Danny's father had been . . . strange, as if Jack
Torrance had something-something-that he was hiding. Or something he was holding
in so deeply submerged in himself that it was impossible to get to.
  "I don't think he shines at all," Hallorann finished. "So you don't worry
about them. You just take care of you. I don't think there's anything here that
can hurt you. So just be cool, okay?"
  "Okay."
  "Danny! Hey, doc!"
  Danny looked around. "That's Mom. She wants me. I have to go."
  "I know you do," Hallorann said. "You have a good time here, Danny. Best you
can, anyway."
  "I will. Thanks, Mr. Hallorann. I feel a lot better."
  The smiling thought came in his mind:
  (Dick, to my friends) (Yes, Dick, okay)
  Their eyes met, and Dick Hallorann winked.
  Danny scrambled across the seat of the car and opened the passenger side door.
As he was getting out, Hallorann said, "Danny?"
  "What?"
  "If there Is trouble . . . you give a call. A big loud holler like the one you
gave a few minutes ago. I might hear you even way down in Florida. And if I do,
I'll come on the run."
  "Okay," Danny said, and smiled.
  "You take care, big boy."
  "I will."
  Danny slammed the door and ran across the parking lot toward the porch, where
Wendy stood holding her elbows against the chill wind. Hallorann watched, the
big grin slowly fading.
  I don't think there's anything here that can hurt you.
  I don't think.
  But what if he was wrong? He had known that this was his last season at the
Overlook ever since he had seen that thing in the bathtub of Room 217. It had
been worse than any picture in any book, and from here the boy running to his
mother looked so small . . .
  I don't think--
  His eyes drifted down to the topiary animals.
  Abruptly he started the car and put it in gear and drove away, trying not to
look back. And of course he did, and of course the porch was empty. They had
gone back inside. It was as if the Overlook had swallowed them.


 Danny was remembering the words of someone else who had worked at the Overlook
during the season:
  Her saying she'd seen something in one of the rooms where . . . a bad thing
happened. That was in Room 217 and I want you to promise me you won't go in
there, Danny . . . steer right clear . . .
  It was a perfectly ordinary door, no different from any other door on the
first two floors of the hotel. It was dark gray, halfway down a corridor that
ran at right angles to the main second-floor hallway. The numbers on the door
looked no different from the house numbers on the Boulder apartment building
they had lived in. A 2, a 1, and a 7. Big deal. Just below them was a tiny glass
circle, a peephole. Danny had tried several of them. From the inside you got a
wide, fish-eye view of the corridor. From outside you could screw up your eye
seven ways to Sunday and still not see a thing. A dirty gyp:
  (Why are you here?)
  After the walk behind the Overlook, he and Mommy had come back and she had
fixed him his favorite lunch, a cheese and bologna sandwich plus Campbell's Bean
Soup. They ate in Dick's kitchen and talked. The radio was on, getting thin and
crackly music from the Estes Park station. The kitchen was his favorite place in
the hotel, and he guessed that Mommy and Daddy must feel the same way, because
after trying their meals in the dining room for three days or so, they had begun
eating in the kitchen by mutual consent, setting up chairs around Dick
Hallorann's butcher block, which was almost as big as their dining room table
back in Stovington, anyway. The dining room had been too depressing, even with
the lights on and the music playing from the tape cassette system in the ofce.
You were still just one of three people sitting at a table surrounded by dozens
of other tables, all empty, all covered with those transparent plastic
dustcloths. Mommy said it was like having dinner in the middle of a Horace
Walpole novel, and Daddy had laughed and agreed. Danny had no idea who Horace
Walpole was, but he did know that Mommy's cooking had begun to taste better as
soon as they began to eat it in the kitchen. He kept discovering little flashes
of Dick Hallorann's personality lying around, and they reassured him like a warm
touch.
  Mommy bad eaten half a sandwich, no soup. She said Daddy must have gone out
for a walk of his own since both the VW and the hotel truck were in the parking
lot. She said she was tired and might lie down for an hour or so, if he thought
he could amuse himself and not get into trouble. Danny told her around a
mouthful of cheese and bologna that he thought he could.
  "Why don't you go out into the playground?" she asked him. "I thought you'd
love that place, with a sandbox for your trucks and all."
  He swallowed and the food went down his throat in a lump that was dry and
hard. "Maybe I will," he said, turning to the radio and fiddling with it.
  "And all those neat hedge animals," she said, taking his empty plate. "Your
father's got to get out and trim them pretty soon."
  "Yeah," he said.
 (Just nasty things . . . once it had to do with those damn hedges clipped to
look like animals . . .)
 "If you see your father before I do, tell him I'm lying down."
 "Sure, Mom."
 She put the dirty dishes in the sink and came back over to him. "Are you happy
here, Danny?"
 He looked at her guilelessly, a milk mustache on his lip. "Uh-huh."
 "No more bad dreams?"
 "No." Tony had come to him once, one night while he was lying in bed, calling
his name faintly and from far away. Danny had squeezed his eyes tightly shut
until Tony had gone.
 "You sure?"
 "Yes, Mom."
 She seemed satisfied. "How's your hand?"
 He flexed it for her. "All better."
 She nodded. Jack had taken the nest under the Pyrex bowl, full of frozen
wasps, out to the incinerator in back of the equipment shed and burned it. They
had seen no more wasps since. He had written to a lawyer in Boulder, enclosing
the snaps of Danny's hand, and the lawyer had called back two days ago-that had
put Jack in a foul temper all afternoon. The lawyer doubted if the company that
had manufactured the bug bomb could be sued successfully because there was only
Jack to testify that he had followed directions printed on the package. Jack had
asked the lawyer if they couldn't purchase some others and test them for the
same defect. Yes, the lawyer said, but the results were highly doubtful even if
all the test bombs malfunctioned. He told Jack of a case that involved an
extension ladder company and a man who had broken his back. Wendy had
commiserated with Jack, but privately she had just been glad that Danny had
gotten off as cheaply as he had. It was best to leave lawsuits to people who
understood them, and that did not include the Torrances. And they had seen no
more wasps since.
 "Go and play, doc. Have fun."
 But he hadn't had fun. He had wandered aimlessly around the hotel, poking into
the maids' closets and the janitor's rooms, looking for something interesting,
not finding it, a small boy padding along a dark blue carpet woven with twisting
black lines. He had tried a room door from time to time, but of course they were
all locked. The passkey was hanging down in the office, he knew where, but Daddy
had told him he shouldn't touch that. And he didn't want to. Did be?
 (Why are you here?)
 There was nothing aimless about it after all. He had been drawn to Room 217 by
a morbid kind of curiosity. He remembered a story Daddy had read to him once
when he was drunk. That had been a long time ago, but the story was just as
vivid now as when Daddy had read it to him. Mommy had scolded Daddy and asked
what he was doing, reading a three-year-old baby something so horrible. The name
of the story was Bluebeard. That was clear in his mind too, because he had
thought at first Daddy was saying Bluebird, and there were no bluebirds in the
story, or birds of any kind for that matter. Actually the story was about
Bluebeard's wife, a pretty lady that had corn-colored hair like Mommy. After
Bluebeard married her, they lived in a big and ominous castle that was not
unlike the Overlook. And every day Bluebeard went off to work and every day he
would tell his pretty little wife not to look in a certain room, although the
key to that room was hanging right on a hook, just like the passkey was hanging
on the office wall downstairs. Bluebeard's wife had gotten more and more curious
about the locked room. She tried to peep through the keyhole the way Danny had
tried to look through Room 217's peephole with similar unsatisfying results.
There was even a picture of her getting down on her knees and trying to look
under the door, but the crack wasn't wide enough. The door swung wide and . . .
  The old fairy tale book had depicted her discovery in ghastly, loving detail.
The image was burned on Danny's mind. The severed heads of Bluebeard's seven
previous wives were in the room, each one on its own pedestal, the eyes turned
up to whites, the mouths unhinged and gaping in silent screams. They were
somehow balanced on necks ragged from the broadsword's decapitating swing, and
there was blood running down the pedestals.
  Terrified, she had turned to flee from the room and the castle, only to
discover Bluebeard standing in the doorway, his terrible eyes blazing. "I told
you not to enter this room," Bluebeard said, unsheathing his sword. "Alas, in
your curiosity you are like the other seven, and though I loved you best of all
your ending shall be as was theirs. Prepare to die, wretched woman!"
  It seemed vaguely to Danny that the story had bad a happy ending, but that had
paled to insignificance beside the two dominant images: the taunting, maddening
locked door with some great secret behind it, and the grisly secret itself,
repeated more than half a dozen times. The locked door and behind it the heads,
the severed beads.
  His hand reached out and stroked the room's doorknob, almost furtively. He had
no idea how long be had been here, standing hypnotized before the bland gray
locked door.
  (And maybe three times I've thought I've seen things . . . nasty things . . .
)
  But Mr. Hallorann--Dick--had also said he didn't think those things could hurt
you. They were like scary pictures in a book, that was all. And maybe he
wouldn't see anything. On the other hand . . .
  He plunged his left hand into his pocket and it came out holding the passkey.
It had been there all along, of course.
  He held it by the square metal tab on the end which had OFFICE printed on it
in Magic Marker. He twirled the key on its chain, watching it go around and
around. After several minutes of this he stopped and slipped the passkey into
the lock. It slid in smoothly, with no hitch, as if it had wanted to be there
all along.
  (I've thought I've seen things . . . nasty things . . . promise me you won't
go in there.)
  (I promise.)
  And a promise was, of course, very important. Still, his curiosity itched at
him as maddeningly as poison ivy in a place you aren't supposed to scratch. But
it was a dreadful kind of curiosity, the kind that makes you peek through your
fingers during the scariest parts of a scary movie. What was beyond that door
would be no movie.
  (I don't think those things can hurt you . . . like scary pictures in a book .
. .)
  Suddenly he reached out with his left hand, not sure of what it was going to
do until it had removed the passkey and stuffed it back into his pocket. He
stared at the door a moment longer, blue-gray eyes wide, then turned quickly and
walked back down the corridor toward the main hallway that ran at right angles
to the corridor he was in.
  Something made him pause there and he wasn't sure what for a moment. Then he
remembered that directly around this corner, on the way back to the stairs,
there was one of those old-fashioned fire extinguishers curled up against the
wall. Curled there like a dozing snake.
  They weren't chemical-type extinguishers at all, Daddy said, although there
were several of those in the kitchen. These were the forerunner of the modern
sprinkler systems. The long canvas hoses hooked directly into the Overlook's
plumbing system, and by turning a single valve you could become a one-man fire
department. Daddy said that the chemical extinguishers, which sprayed foam or
CO, were much better. The chemicals smothered fires, took away the oxygen they
needed to burn, while a high-pressure spray might just spread the flames around.
Daddy said that Mr. Ullman should replace the old-fashioned hoses right along
with the old-fashioned boiler, but Mr. Ullman would probably do neither because
he was a CHEAP PRICK. Danny knew that this was one of the worst epithets his
father could summon. It was applied to certain doctors, dentists, and appliance
repairmen, and also to the head of his English Department at Stovington, who had
disallowed some of Daddy's book orders because he said the books would put them
over budget. "Over budget, hell," he had fumed to Wendy-Danny had been listening
from his bedroom where he was supposed to be asleep. "He's just saving the last
five hundred bucks for himself, the CHEAP PRICK."
  Danny looked around the corner.
  The extinguisher was there, a fiat hose folded back a dozen times on itself,
the red tank attached to the wall. Above it was an ax in a glass case like a
museum exhibit, with white words printed on a red background: IN CASE OF
EMERGENCY, BREAK GLASS. Danny could read the word EMERGENCY, which was also the
name of one of his favorite TV shows, but was unsure of the rest. But he didn't
like the way the word was used in connection with that long fiat hose. EMERGENCY
was', fire, explosions, car crashes, hospitals, sometimes death. And he didn't
like the way that hose hung so blandly on the wall. When he was alone, he always
skittered past these extinguishers as fast as he could. No particular reason. It
just felt better to go fast. It felt safer.
  Now, heart thumping loudly in his chest, he came around the corner and looked
down the hall past the extinguisher to the stairs. Mommy was down there,
sleeping. And if Daddy was back from his walk, he would probably be sitting in
the kitchen, eating a sandwich and reading a book. He would just walk right past
that old extinguisher and go downstairs.
  He started toward it, moving closer to the far wall until his right arm was
brushing the expensive silk paper. Twenty steps away. Fifteen. A dozen.
  When he was ten steps away, the brass nozzle suddenly rolled off the fat loop
it had been lying
  (sleeping?)
  on and fell to the hall carpet with a dull thump. It lay there, the dark bore
of its muzzle pointing at Danny. He stopped immediately, his shoulders twitching
forward with the suddenness of his scare. His blood thumped thickly in his ears
and temples. His mouth had gone dry and sour, his hands curled into fists. Yet
the nozzle of the hose only lay there, its brass casing glowing mellowly, a loop
of flat canvas leading back up to the red-painted frame bolted to the wall.
  So it had fallen off, so what? It was only a fire extinguisher, nothing else.
It was stupid to think that it looked like some poison snake from "Wide World of
Animals" that had heard him and woken up. Even if the stitched canvas did look a
little bit like scales. He would just step over it and go down the hall to the
stairs, walking a little bit fast, maybe, to make sure it didn't snap out after
him and curl around his foot...
  He wiped his lips with his left hand, in unconscious imitation of his father,
and took a step forward. No movement from the hose. Another step. Nothing.
There, see how stupid you are? You got all worked up thinking about that dumb
room and that dumb Bluebeard story and that hose was probably ready to fall off
for the last five years. That's all.
  Danny stared at the hose on the floor and thought of wasps.
  Eight steps away, the nozzle of the hose gleamed peacefully at him from the
rug as if to say: Don't worry. I'm just a hose, that's all. And even if that
isn't all, what I do to you won't be much worse than a bee sting. Or a wasp
sting. What would I want to do to a nice little boy like you . . . except bite..
. and bite . . . and bite?
  Danny took another step, and another. His breath was dry and harsh in his
throat. Panic was close now. He began to wish the hose would move, then at last
be would know, he would be sure. He took another step and now he was within
striking distance. But it's not going to strike at you, he thought hysterically.
How can it strike at you, bite at you, when it's just a hose?
  Maybe it's full of wasps.
  His internal temperature plummeted to ten below zero. He stared at the black
bore in the center of the nozzle, nearly hypnotized. Maybe it was full of wasps,
secret wasps, their brown bodies bloated with poison, so full of autumn poison
that it dripped from their stingers in clear drops of fluid.
  Suddenly he knew that he was nearly frozen with terror; if he did not make his
feet go now, they would become locked to the carpet and he would stay here,
staring at the black hole in the center of the brass nozzle like a bird staring
at a snake, he would stay here until his daddy found him and then what would
happen?
  With a high moan, he made himself run. As he reached the hose, some trick of
the light made the nozzle seem to move, to revolve as if to strike, and he
leaped high in the air above it; in his panicky state it seemed that his legs
pushed him nearly all the way to the ceiling, that he could feel the stiff back
hairs that formed his cowlick brushing the hallway's plaster ceiling, although
later he knew that couldn't have been so.
  He came down on the other side of the hose and ran, and suddenly he heard it
behind him, coming for him, the soft dry whicker of that brass snake's head as
it slithered rapidly along the carpet after him like a rattlesnake moving
swiftly through a dry field of grass. It was coming for him, and suddenly the
stairs seemed very far away; they seemed to retreat a running step into the
distance for each running step he took toward them.
  Daddy! he tried to scream, but his closed throat would not allow a word to
pass. He was on his own. Behind him the sound grew louder, the dry sliding sound
of the snake, slipping swiftly over the carpet's dry hackles. At his heels now,
perhaps rising up with the clear poison dribbling from its brass snout.
  Danny reached the stairs and had to pinwheel his arms crazily for balance. For
one moment it seemed sure that he would cartwheel over and go head-for-heels to
the bottom.
  He threw a glance back over his shoulder.
  The hose had not moved. It lay as it had lain, one loop off the frame, the
brass nozzle on the hall floor, the nozzle pointing disinterestedly away from
him. You see, stupid? he berated himself. You made it all up, scaredy-cat. It
was all your imagination, scaredy-cat, scaredy-cat.
  He clung to the stairway railing, his legs trembling in reaction.
  (It never chased you)
  his mind told him, and seized on that thought, and played it back.
  (never chased you, never chased you, never did, never did)
  It was nothing to be afraid of. Why, he could go back and put that hose right
into its frame, if he wanted to. He could, but he didn't think he would. Because
what if it had chased him and had gone back when it saw that it couldn't . . .
quite . . . catch him?
  The hose lay on the carpet, almost seeming to ask him if he would like to come
back and try again.
 Panting, Danny ran downstairs.


  Late that afternoon Jack got a cot from the first-floor storage room and put
it in the corner of their bedroom. Wendy had expected that the boy would be half
the night getting to sleep, but Danny was nodding before "The Waltons" was half
over, and fifteen minutes after they had tucked biro in he was far down in
sleep, moveless, one band tucked under his cheek. Wendy sat watching him,
holding her place in a fat paperback copy of Cashelmara with one finger. Jack
sat at his desk, looking at his play.
  "Oh shit," Jack said.
  Wendy looked up from her contemplation of Danny. "What?"
  "Nothing."
  He looked down at the play with smoldering ill-temper. How could he have
thought it was good? It was puerile. It had been done a thousand times. Worse,
he had no idea how to finish it. Once it had seemed simple enough. Denker, in a
fit of rage, seizes the poker from beside the fireplace and beats saintly Gary
to death. Then, standing spread-legged over the body, the bloody poker in one
hand, he screams at the audience: "It's here somewhere and I will find it!"
Then, as the lights dim and the curtain is slowly drawn, the audience sees
Gary's body face down on the forestage as Denker strides to the upstage bookcase
and feverishly begins pulling books from the shelves, looking at them, throwing
them aside. He bad thought it was something old enough to be new, a play whose
novelty alone might be enough to see it through a successful Broadway run: a
tragedy in five acts.
  But, in addition to his sudden diversion of interest to the _ Overlooks
history, something else had happened. He had developed opposing feelings about
his characters. This was something quite new. Ordinarily he liked all of his
characters, the good and the bad. He was glad he did. It allowed him to try to
see all of their sides and understand their motivations more clearly. His
favorite story, sold to a small southern Maine magazine called Contraband for
copies, had been a piece called "The Monkey Is Here, Paul DeLong." It had been
about a child molester about to commit suicide in his furnished room. The child
molester's name had been Paul DeLong, Monkey to his friends. Jack had liked
Monkey very much. He sympathized with Monkey's bizarre needs. knowing that
Monkey was not the only one to blame for the three rape-murders in his past.
There had been bad parents, the father a beater as his own father had been, the
mother a limp and silent dishrag as his mother had been. A homosexual experience
in grammar school. Public humiliation. Worse experiences in high school and
college. He had been arrested and sent to an institution after exposing himself
to a pair of little girls getting off a school bus. Worst of all, he had been
dismissed from the institution, let back out onto the streets, because the man
in charge had decided he was all right. This man's name had been Grimmer.
Grimmer had known that Monkey DeLong was exhibiting deviant symptoms, but he had
written the good, hopeful report and had let him go anyway. Jack liked and
sympathized with Grimmer, too. Grimmer had to run an understaffed and
underfunded institution and try to keep the whole thing together with spit,
baling wire, and nickle-and-dime appropriations from a state legislature who had
to go back and face the voters. Grimmer knew that Monkey could interact with
other people, that he did not soil his pants or try to stab his fellow inmates
with the scissors. He did not think he was Napoleon. The staff psychiatrist in
charge of Monkey's case thought there was a better-than-even chance that Monkey
could make it on the street, and they both knew that the longer a man is in an
institution the more he comes to need that closed environment, like a junkie
with his smack. And meanwhile, people were knocking down the doors. Paranoids,
schizoids, cycloids, semicatatonics, men who claimed to have gone to heaven in
flying saucers, women who had burned their children's sex organs off with Bic
lighters, alcoholics, pyromaniacs, kleptomaniacs, manic-depressives, suicidals.
Tough old world, baby. If you're not bolted together tightly, you're gonna
shake, rattle, and roll before you turn thirty. Jack could sympathize with
Grimmer's problem. He could sympathize with the parents of the murder victims.
With the murdered children themselves, of course. And with Monkey DeLong. Let
the reader lay blame. In those days he hadn't wanted to judge. The cloak of the
moralist sat badly on his shoulders.
  He had started The Little School in the same optimistic vein. But lately he
had begun to choose up sides, and worse still, he had come to loathe his hero,
Gary Benson. Originally conceived as a bright boy more cursed with money than
blessed with it, a boy who wanted more than anything to compile a good record so
he could go to a good university because he had earned admission and not because
his father had pulled strings, he had become to Jack a kind of simpering Goody
Two-shoes, a postulant before the altar of knowledge rather than a sincere
acolyte, an outward paragon of Boy Scout virtues, inwardly cynical, filled not
with real brilliance (as he had first been conceived) but only with sly animal
cunning. All through the play he unfailingly addressed Denker as "sir," just as
Jack had taught his own son to address those older and those in authority as
"sir." He thought that Danny used the word quite sincerely, and Gary Benson as
originally conceived had too, but as he had begun Act V, it had come more and
more strongly to him that Gary was using the word satirically, outwardly
straight-faced while the Gary Benson inside was mugging and leering at Denker.
Denker, who had never had any of the things Gary had. Denker, who had had to
work all his life just to become head of a single little school. Who was now
faced with ruin over this handsome, innocent-seeming rich boy who had cheated on
his Final Composition and had then cunningly covered his tracks. Jack had seen
Denker the teacher as not much different from the strutting South American
little Caesars in their banana kingdoms, standing dissidents up against the wall
of the handiest squash or handball court, a super-zealot in a comparatively
small puddle, a man whose every whim becomes a crusade. In the beginning he had
wanted to use his play as a microcosm to say something about the abuse of power.
Now he tended more and more to see Denker as a Mr. Chips figure, and the tragedy
was not the intellectual racking of Gary Benson but rather the destruction of a
kindly old teacher and headmaster unable to see through the cynical wiles of
this monster masquerading as a boy.
  He hadn't been able to finish the play.
  Now he sat looking down at it, scowling, wondering if there was any way he
could salvage the situation. He didn't really think there was. He bad begun with
one play and it had somehow turned into another, presto-chango. Well, what the
hell. Either way it had been done before. Either way it was a load of shit. And
why was he driving himself crazy about it tonight anyway? After the day just
gone by it was no wonder he couldn't think straight.
  "--get him down?"
  He looked up, trying to blink the cobwebs away. "Huh?"
  "I said, how are we going to get him down? We've got to get him out of here,
Jack."
  For a moment his wits were so scattered that he wasn't even sure what she was
talking about. Then he realized and uttered a short, barking laugh.
  "You say that as if it were so easy."
  "I didn't mean--"
  "No problem, Wendy. I'll just change clothes in that telephone booth down in
the lobby and fly him to Denver on my back. Superman Jack Torrance, they called
me in my salad days."
  Her face registered slow hurt.
  "I understand the problem, Jack. The radio is broken. The snow . . . but you
have to understand Danny's problem. My God, don't you? He was nearly catatonic,
Jack! What if he hadn't come out of that?"
  "But he did," Jack said, a trifle shortly. He had been frightened at Danny's
blank-eyed, slack-faced state too, of course he had. At first. But the more he
thought about it, the more he wondered if it hadn't been a piece of play-acting
put on to escape his punishment. He had, after all, been trespassing.
  "All the same," she said. She came to him and sat on the end of the bed by his
desk. Her face was both surprised and worried. "Jack, the bruises on his neck!
Something got at him! And I want him away from it!"
  "Don't shout," he said. "My head aches, Wendy. I'm as worried about this as
you are, so please . . . don't . . . shout."
  "All right," she said, lowering her voice. "I won't shout. But I don't
understand you, Jack. Someone is in here with us. And not a very nice someone,
either. We have to get down to Sidewinder, not just Danny but all of us.
Quickly. And you . . . you're sitting there reading your play!"
  " 'We have to get down, we have to get down,' you keep saying that. You must
think I really am Superman."
  "I think you're my husband," she said softly, and looked down at her hands.
  His temper flared. He slammed the playscript down, knocking the edges of the
pile out of true again and crumpling the sheets on the bottom.
  "It's time you got some of the home truths into you, Wendy. You don't seem to
have internalized them, as the sociologists say. They're knocking around up in
your head like a bunch of loose cueballs. You need to shoot them into the
pockets. You need to understand that we are snowed in."
  Danny had suddenly become active in his bed. Still sleeping, he had begun to
twist and turn. The way he always did when we fought, Wendy thought dismally.
And we're doing it again.
  "Don't wake him up, Jack. Please."
  He glanced over at Danny and some of the flush went out of his cheeks. "Okay.
I'm sorry. I'm sorry I sounded mad, Wendy. It's not really for you. But I broke
the radio. If it's anybody's fault it's mine. That was our big link to the
outside. Olly-oily-in-for-free. Please come get us, Mister Ranger. We can't stay
out this late."
  "Don't," she said, and put a hand on his shoulder. He leaned his head against
it. She brushed his hair with her other hand. "I guess you've got a right, after
what I accused you of. Sometimes I am like my mother. I can be a bitch. But you
have to understand that some things . . . are hard to get over. You have to
understand that."
  "Do you mean his arm?" His lips had thinned.
  "Yes," Wendy said, and then she rushed on: "But it's not just you. I worry
when he goes out to play. I worry about him wanting a two-wheeler next year,
even one with training wheels. I worry about his teeth and his eyesight and
about this thing, what he calls his shine. I worry. Because he's little and he
seems very fragile and because . . . because something in this hotel seems to
want him. And it will go through us to get him if it has to. That's why we must
get him out, Jack. I know that! I feel that! We must get him out!"
 Her hand had tightened painfully on his shoulder in her agitation, but he
didn't move away. One hand found the firm weight of her left breast and he began
to stroke it through her shirt.
 "Wendy," he said, and stopped. She waited for him to rearrange whatever he had
to say. His strong hand on her breast felt good, soothing. "I could maybe
snowshoe him down. He could walk part of the way himself, but I would mostly
have to carry him. It would mean camping out one, two, maybe three nights. That
would mean building a travois to carry supplies and bedrolls on. We have the
AM/FM radio, so we could pick a day when the weather forecast called for a
three-day spell of good weather. But if the forecast was wrong," he finished,
his voice soft and measured, "I think we might die."
 Her face had paled. It looked shiny, almost ghostly. He continued to stroke
her breast, rubbing the ball of his thumb gently over the nipple.
 She made a soft sound--from his words or in reaction to his gentle pressure on
her breast, he couldn't tell. He raised his hand slightly and undid the top
button of her shirt. Wendy shifted her legs slightly. All at once her jeans
seemed too tight, slightly irritating in a pleasant sort of way.
 "It would mean leaving you alone because you can't snowshoe worth beans. It
would be maybe three days of not knowing. Would you want that?" His hand dropped
to the second button, slipped it, and the beginning of her cleavage was exposed.
 "No," she said in a voice that was slightly thick. She glanced over at Danny.
He had stopped twisting and turning. His thumb had crept back into his mouth. So
that was all right. But Jack was leaving something out of the picture. It was
too bleak. There was something else . . . what?
 "If we stay put," Jack said, unbuttoning the third and fourth buttons with
that same deliberate slowness, "a ranger from the park or a game warden is going
to poke in here just to find out how we're doing. At that point we simply tell
him we want down. He'll see to it." He slipped her naked breasts into the wide V
of the open shirt, bent, and molded his lips around the stem of a nipple. It was
hard and erect. He slipped his tongue slowly back and forth across it in a way
he knew she liked. Wendy moaned a little and arched her back.
 (?Something I've forgotten?)
 "Honey?" she asked. On their own her hands sought the back of his head so that
when he answered his voice was muffled against her flesh.
 "How would the ranger take us out?"
 He raised his head slightly to answer and then settled his mouth against the
other nipple.
 "If the helicopter was spoken for I guess it would have to be by snowmobile."
 (!!!)
 "But we have one of those! Ullman said so!"
 His mouth froze against her breast for a moment, and then he sat up. Her own
face was slightly flushed, her eyes overbright. Jack's on the other hand, was
calm, as if he had been reading a rather dull book instead of engaging in
foreplay with his wife.
  "If there's a snowmobile there's no problem," she said excitedly. "We can all
three go down together."
  "Wendy, I've never driven a snowmobile in my life."
  "It can't be that hard to learn. Back in Vermont you see ten-year-olds driving
them in the fields . . . although what their parents can be thinking of I don't
know. And you had a motorcycle when we met." He had, a Honda 350cc. He had
traded it in on a Saab shortly after he and Wendy took up residence together.
  "I suppose I could," he said slowly. "But I wonder how well it's been
maintained. Ullman and Watson . . . they run this place from May to October.
They have summertime minds. I know it won't have gas in it. There may not be
plugs or a battery, either. I don't want you to get your hopes up over your
head, Wendy."
  She was totally excited now, leaning over him, her breasts tumbling out of her
shirt. He had a sudden impulse to seize one and twist it until she shrieked.
Maybe that would teach her to shut up.
  "The gas is no problem," she said. "The VW` and the hotel truck are both full.
There's gas for the emergency generator downstairs, too. And there must be a
gascan out in that shed so you could carry extra."
  "Yes," he said. "There is" Actually there were three of them, two five-gallons
and a two-gallon.
  "I'll bet the sparkplugs and the battery are out there too. Nobody would store
their snowmobile in one place and the plugs and battery someplace else, would
they?"
  "Doesn't seem likely, does it?" He got up and walked over to where Danny lay
sleeping. A spill of hair had fallen across his forehead and Jack brushed it
away gently. Danny didn't stir.
  "And if you can get it running you'll take us out?" she asked from behind him.
"On the first day the radio says good weather?"
  For a moment he didn't answer. He stood looking down at his son, and his mixed
feelings dissolved in a wave of love. He was the way she had said, vulnerable,
fragile. The marks on his neck were very prominent.
  "Yes," he said. "I'll get it running and we'll get out as quick as we can."
  "Thank God!"
  He turned around. She had taken off her shirt and lay on the bed, her belly
flat, her breasts aimed perkily at the ceiling. She was playing with them
lazily, flicking at the nipples. "Hurry up, gentlemen," she said softly, "time."

                             ***

 After, with no light burning in the room but the night light that Danny had
brought with him from his room, she lay in the crook of his arm, feeling
deliciously at peace. She found it hard to believe they could be sharing the
Overlook with a murderous stowaway.
  "Jack?"
  "Hmmmm?"
  "What got at him?"
  He didn't answer her directly. "He does have something. Some talent the rest
of us are missing. The most of us, beg pardon. And maybe the Overlook has
something, too."
  "Ghosts?"
  "I don't know. Not in the Algernon Blackwood sense, that's for sure. More like
the residues of the feelings of the people who have stayed here. Good things and
bad things. In that sense, I suppose that every big hotel has got its ghosts.
Especially the old ones."
  "But a dead woman in the tub . . . Jack, he's not losing his mind, is he?"
  He gave her a brief squeeze. "We know he goes into . . . well, trances, for
want of a better word . . . from time to time. We know that when he's in them he
sometimes . . . sees? . . . things he doesn't understand. If precognitive
trances are possible, they're probably functions of the subconscious mind. Freud
said that the subconscious never speaks to us in literal language. Only in
symbols. If you dream about being in a bakery where no one speaks English, you
may be worried about your ability to support your family. Or maybe just that no
one understands you. I've read that the falling dream is a standard outlet for
feelings of insecurity. Games, little games. Conscious on one side of the net,
subconscious on the other, serving some cockamamie image back and forth. Same
with mental illness, with hunches, all of that. Why should precognition be any
different? Maybe Danny really did see blood all over the walls of the
Presidential Suite. To a kid his age, the image of blood and the concept of
death are nearly interchangeable. To kids, the image is always more accessible
than the concept, anyway. William Carlos Williams knew that, he was a
pediatrician. When we grow up, concepts gradually get easier and we leave the
images to the poets . . . and I'm just rambling on."
  "I like to hear you ramble."
  "She said it, folks. She said it. You all heard it."
  "The marks on his neck, Jack. Those are real."
  "Yes."
  There was nothing else for a long time. She had begun to think he must have
gone to sleep and she was slipping into a drowse herself when he said:
  "I can think of two explanations for those. And neither of them involves a
fourth party in the hotel."
  "What?" She came up on one elbow.
  "Stigmata, maybe," he said.
  "Stigmata? Isn't that when people bleed on Good Friday or something?"
  "Yes. Sometimes people who believe deeply in Christ's divinity exhibit
bleeding marks on their hands and feet during the Holy Week. It was more common
in the Middle Ages than now. In those days such people were considered blessed
by God. I don't think the Catholic Church proclaimed any of it as out-and-out
miracles, which was pretty smart of them. Stigmata isn't much different from
some of the things the yogis can do. It's better understood now, that's all. The
people who understand the interaction between the mind and the body-study it, I
mean, no one understands it-believe we have a lot more control over our
involuntary functions than they used to think. You can slow your heartbeat if
you think about it enough. Speed up your own metabolism. Make yourself sweat
more. Or make yourself bleed."
  "You think Danny thought those bruises onto his neck? Jack, I just can't
believe that."
  "I can believe it's possible, although it seems unlikely to me, too. What's
more likely is that he did it to himself."
  "To himself?"
  "He's gone into these 'trances' and hurt himself in the past. Do you remember
the time at the supper table? About two years ago, I think. We were super-pissed
at each other. Nobody talking very much. Then, all at once, his eyes rolled up
in his head and he went face-first into his dinner. Then onto the floor.
Remember?"
  "Yes," she said. "I sure do. I thought he was having a convulsion."
  "Another time we were in the park," he said. "Just Danny and I. Saturday
afternoon. He was sitting on a swing, coasting back and forth. He collapsed onto
the ground. It was like he'd been shot. I ran over and picked him up and all of
a sudden he just came around. He sort of blinked at me and said, `I hurt my
tummy. Tell Mommy to close the bedroom windows if it rains.' And that night it
rained like hell."
  "Yes, but--"
  "And he's always coming in with cuts and scraped elbows. His shins look like a
battlefield in distress. And when you ask him how he got this one or that one,
he just says `Oh, I was playing,' and that's the end of it."
  "Jack, all kids get bumped and bruised up. With little boys it's almost
constant from the time they learn to walk until they're twelve or thirteen."
  "And I'm sure Danny gets his share," Jack responded. "He's an active kid. But
I remember that day in the park and that night at the supper table. And I wonder
if some of our kid's bumps and bruises come from just keeling over. That Dr.
Edmonds said Danny did it right in his office, for Christ's sake!"
  "All right. But those bruises were fingers. I'd swear to it. He didn't get
them falling down."
  "He goes into a trance," Jack said. "Maybe he sees something that happened in
that room. An argument. Maybe a suicide. Violent emotions. It isn't like
watching a movie; he's in a highly suggestible state. He's right in the damn
thing. His subconscious is maybe visualizing whatever happened in a symbolic way
. . . as a dead woman who's alive again, zombie, undead, ghoul, you pick your
term."
  "You're giving me goose-bumps," she said thickly.
  "I'm giving myself a few. I'm no psychiatrist, but it seems to fit so well.
The walking dead woman as a symbol for dead emotions, dead lives, that just
won't give up and go away . . . but because she's a subconscious figure, she's
also him. In the trance state, the conscious Danny is submerged. The
subconscious figure is pulling the strings. So Danny put his hands around his
own neck and-"
  "Stop," she said. "I get the picture. I think that's more frightening than
having a stranger creeping around the halls, Jack. You can move away from a
stranger. You can't move away from yourself. You're talking about
schizophrenia."
  "Of a very limited type," he said, but a trifle uneasily. "And of a very
special nature. Because he does seem able to read thoughts, and he really does
seem to have precognitive flashes from time to time. I can't think of that as
mental illness no matter how hard I try. We all have schizo deposits in us
anyway. I think as Danny gets older, he'll get this under control."
  "If you're right, then it's imperative that we get him out. Whatever he has,
this hotel is making it worse."
  "I wouldn't say that," he objected. "If he'd done as he was told, he never
would have gone up to that room in the first place. It never would have
happened."
  "My God, Jack! Are you implying that being half-strangled was a . . . a
fitting punishment for being off limits?"
  "No . . . no. Of course not. But-"
  "No buts," she said, shaking her head violently. "The truth is, we're
guessing. We don't have any idea when he might turn a corner and run into one of
those . . . air pockets, one-reel horror movies, whatever they are. We have to
get him away." She laughed a little in the darkness. "Next thing we'll be seeing
things."
  "Don't talk nonsense," he said, and in the darkness of the room he saw the
hedge lions bunching around the path, no longer flanking it but guarding it,
hungry November lions. Cold sweat sprang out on his brow.
  "You didn't really see anything, did you?" she was asking. "I mean, when you
went up to that room. You didn't see anything?"
  The lions were gone. Now he saw a pink pastel shower curtain with a dark shape
lounging behind it. The closed door. That muffled, hurried thump, and sounds
after it that might have been running footsteps. The horrible, lurching beat of
his own heart as he struggled with the passkey.
  "Nothing," he said, and that was true. He had been strung tip, not sure of
what was happening. He hadn't had a chance to sift through his thoughts for a
reasonable explanation concerning the bruises on his son's neck. He had been
pretty damn suggestible himself. Hallucinations could sometimes be catching.

  "And you haven't changed your mind? About the snowmobile, I mean?"
  His hands clamped into sudden tight fists
  (Stop nagging me! )
  by his sides. "I said I would, didn't I? I will. Now go to sleep. It's been a
long hard day."
  "And how," she said. There was a rustle of bedclothes as she turned toward him
and kissed his shoulder. "I love you, Jack."
  "I love you too," he said, but he was only mouthing the words. His hands were
still clenched into fists. They felt like rocks on the ends of his arms. The
pulse beat prominently in his forehead. She hadn't said a word about what was
going to happen to them after they got down, when the party was over. Not one
word. It had been Danny this and Danny that and Jack I'm so scared. Oh yes, she
was scared of a lot of closet boogeymen and jumping shadows, plenty scared. But
there was no lack of real ones, either. When they got down to Sidewinder they
would arrive with sixty dollars and the clothes they stood up in. Not even a
car. Even if Sidewinder bad a pawnshop, which it didn't, they had nothing to
hock but Wendy's ninety-dollar diamond engagement ring and the Sony AM/FM radio.
A pawnbroker might give them twenty bucks. A kind pawnbroker. There would be no
job, not even part-time or seasonal, except maybe shoveling out driveways for
three dollars a shot. The picture of John Torrance, thirty years old, who had
once published in Esquire and who had harbored dreams-not at all unreasonable
dreams, he feltof becoming a major American writer during the next decade, with
a shovel from the Sidewinder Western Auto on his shoulder, ringing doorbells . .
. that picture suddenly came to him much more clearly than the hedge lions and
he clenched his fists tighter still, feeling the fingernails sink into his palms
and draw blood in mystic quarter-moon shapes. John Tor_ rance, standing in line
to change his sixty dollars into food stamps, standing in line again at the
Sidewinder Methodist Church to get donated commodities and dirty looks from the
locals. John Torrance explaining to Al that they'd just had to leave, had to
shut down the boiler, had to leave the Overlook and all it contained open to
vandals or thieves on snow machines because, you see, Al, attendez-vous, Al,
there are ghosts up there and they have it in for my boy. Good-by, Al. Thoughts
of Chapter Four, Spring Comes for John Torrance. What then? Whatever then? They
might be able to get to the West Coast in the VW, he supposed. A new fuel pump
would do it. Fifty miles west of here and it was all downhill, you could damn
near put the bug in neutral and coast to Utah. On to sunny California, land of
oranges and opportunity. A man with his sterling record of alcoholism, student-
beating, and ghost-chasing would undoubtedly be able to write his own ticket.
Anything you like. Custodial engineer-swamping out Greyhound buses. The
automotive business-washing cars in a rubber suit. The culinary arts, perhaps,
washing dishes in a diner. Or possibly a more responsible position, such as
pumping gas. A job like that even held the intellectual stimulation of making
change and writing out credit slips. I can give you twenty-five hours a week at

the minimum wage. That was heavy tunes in a year when Wonder bread went for
sixty cents a loaf.
 Blood had begun to trickle down from his palms. Like stigmata, oh yes. He
squeezed tighter, savaging himself with pain. His wife was asleep beside him,
why not? There were no problems. He had agreed to take her and Danny away from
the big bad boogeyman and there were no problems. So you see, Al, I thought the
best thing to do would be to
 (kill her.)
 The thought rose up from nowhere, naked and unadorned. The urge to tumble her
out of bed, naked, bewildered, just beginning to wake up; to pounce on her,
seize her neck like the green limb of a young aspen and to throttle her, thumbs
on windpipe, fingers pressing against the top of her spine, jerking her head up
and ramming it back down against the floorboards, again and again, whamming,
whacking, smashing, crashing. Jitter and jive, baby. Shake, rattle, and roll. He
would make her take her medicine. Every drop. Every last bitter drop.
 He was dimly aware of a muffled noise somewhere, just outside his hot and
racing inner world. He looked across the room and Danny was thrashing again,
twisting in his bed and rumpling the blankets. The boy was moaning deep in his
throat, a small, caged sound. What nightmare? A purple woman, long dead,
shambling after him down twisting hotel corridors? Somehow he didn't think so.
Something else chased Danny in his dreams. Something worse.
 The bitter lock of his emotions was broken. He got out of bed and went across
to the boy, feeling sick and ashamed of himself. It was Danny he had to think
of, not Wendy, not himself. Only Danny. And no matter what shape he wrestled the
facts into, he knew in his heart that Danny must be taken out. He straightened
the boy's blankets and added the quilt from the foot of the bed. Danny had
quieted again now. Jack touched the sleeping forehead
 (what monsters capering just behind that ridge of bone?)
 and found it warm, but not overly so. And he was sleeping peacefully again.
Queer.
 He got back into bed and tried to sleep. It eluded him.
 It was so unfair that things should turn out this way--bad luck seemed to
stalk them. They hadn't been able to shake it by coming up here after all. By
the time they arrived in Sidewinder tomorrow afternoon, the golden opportunity
would have evaporated--gone the way of the blue suede shoe, as an old roommate
of his had been wont to say. Consider the difference if they didn't go down, if
they could somehow stick it out. The play would get finished. One way or the
other, he would tack an ending onto it. His own uncertainty about his characters
might add an appealing touch of ambiguity to his original ending. Perhaps it
would even make him some money, it wasn't impossible. Even lacking that, Al
might well convince the Stovington Board to rehire him. He would be on pro of
course, maybe for as long as three years, but if he could stay sober and keep
writing, he might not have to stay at Stovington for three years. Of course he

hadn't cared much for Stovington before, he had felt stifled, buried alive, but
that had been an immature reaction. Furthermore, how much could a man enjoy
teaching when he went through his first three classes with a skull-busting
hangover every second or third day? It wouldn't be that way again. He would be
able to handle his responsibilities much better. He was sure of it.
  Somewhere in the midst of that thought, things began to break up and he
drifted down into sleep. His last thought followed him down like a sounding
bell:
  It seemed that he might be able to find peace here. At last. If they would
only let him.

                             ***

 When he woke up he was standing in the bathroom of 217.
 (been walking in my sleep again--why?--no radios to break up here)
 The bathroom light was on, the room behind him in darkness. The shower curtain
was drawn around the long claw-footed tub. The bathmat beside it was wrinkled
and wet.
 He began to feel afraid, but the very dreamlike quality of his fear told him
this was not real. Yet that could not contain the fear. So many things at the
Overlook seemed like dreams.
 He moved across the floor to the tub, not wanting to be helpless to turn his
feet back.
 He flung the curtain open.
 Lying in the tub, naked, lolling almost weightless in the water, was George
Hatfield, a knife stuck in his chest. The water around him was stained a bright
pink. George's eyes were closed. His penis floated limply, like kelp.
 "George--" he heard himself say.
 At the word, George's eyes snapped open. They were silver, not human eyes at
all. George's hands, fish-white, found the sides of the tub and he pulled
himself up to a sitting position. The knife stuck straight out from his chest,
equidistantly placed between nipples. The wound was lipless.
 "You set the timer ahead," silver-eyed George told him.
 "No, George, I didn't. I--"
 "I don't stutter."
 George was standing now, still fixing him with that inhuman silver glare, but
his mouth had drawn back in a dead and grimacing smile. He threw one leg over
the porcelained side of the tub. One white and wrinkled foot placed itself on
the bathmat.
 "First you tried to run me over on my bike and then you set the timer ahead
and then you tried to stab me to death but I still don't stutter." George was
coming for him, his hands out, the fingers slightly curled. He smelled moldy and
wet, like leaves that had been rained on.
  "It was for your own good," Jack said, backing up. "I set it ahead for your
own good. Furthermore, I happen to know you cheated on your Final Composition."
  "I don't cheat . . . and I don't stutter."
  George's hands touched his neck.
  Jack turned and ran, ran with the floating, weightless slowness that is so
common to dreams.
  "You did! You did cheat!" he screamed in fear and anger as he crossed the
darkened bed/sitting room. "I'll prove it!"
  George's hands were on his neck again. Jack's heart swelled with fear until he
was sure it would burst. And then, at last, his hand curled around the doorknob
and it turned under his hand and he yanked the door open. He plunged out, not
into the second-floor hallway, but into the basement room beyond the arch. The
cobwebby light was on. His campchair, stark and geometrical, stood beneath it.
And all around it was a miniature mountain range of boxes and crates and banded
bundles of records and invoices and God knew what. Relief surged through him.
  "I'll find it!" he heard himself screaming. He seized a damp and moldering
cardboard box; it split apart in his hands, spilling out a waterfall of yellow
flimsies. "It's here somewhere! I will find it!" He plunged his hands deep into
the pile of papers and came up with a dry, papery wasps' nest in one hand and a
timer in the other. The timer was ticking. Attached to its back was a length of
electrical cord and attached to the other end of the cord was a bundle of
dynamite. "Here!" he screamed. "Here, take it!"
  His relief became absolute triumph. He had done more than escape George,; be
had conquered. With these talismanic objects in his hands, George would never
touch him again. George would flee in terror.
  He began to turn so he could confront George, and that was when George's hands
settled around his neck, squeezing, stopping his breath, damming up his
respiration entirely after one final dragging gasp.
  "I don't stutter," whispered George from behind him.
  He dropped the wasps' nest and wasps boiled out of it in a furious brown and
yellow wave. His lungs were on fire. His wavering sight fell on the timer and
the sense of triumph returned, along with a cresting wave of righteous wrath.
Instead of connecting the timer to dynamite, the cord ran to the gold knob of a
stout black cane, like the one his father had carried after the accident with
the milk truck.
  He grasped it and the cord parted. The cane felt heavy and right in his hands.
He swung it back over his shoulder. On the way up it glanced against the wire
from which the light bulb depended and the light began to swing back and forth,
making the room's hooded shadows rock monstrously against the floor and walls.
On the way down the cane struck something much harder. George screamed. The grip
on Jack's throatloosened.
  He tore free of George's grip and whirled. George was on his knees, his head
drooping, his hands laced together on top of it. Blood welled through his
fingers.
  "Please," George whispered humbly. "Give me a break, Mr. Torrance,"
  "Now you'll take your medicine," Jack grunted. "Now by God, won't you. Young
pup. Young worthless cur. Now by God, right now. Every drop. Every single damn
drop!"
  As the light swayed above him and the shadows danced and flapped, he began to
swing the cane, bringing it down again and again, his arm rising and falling
like a machine. George's bloody protecting fingers fell away from his head and
Jack brought the cane down again and again, and on his neck and shoulders and
back and arms. Except that the cane was no longer precisely a cane; it seemed to
be a mallet with some kind of brightly striped handle. A mallet with a hard side
and soft side. The business end was clotted with blood and hair. And the flat,
whacking sound of the mallet against flesh had been replaced with a hollow
booming sound, echoing and reverberating. His own voice had taken on this same
quality, bellowing, disembodied. And yet, paradoxically, it sounded weaker,
slurred, petulant . . . as if he were drunk.
  The figure on its knees slowly raised its head, as if in supplication. There
was not a face, precisely, but only a mask of blood through which eyes peered.
He brought the mallet back for a final whistling downstroke and it was fully
launched before he saw that the supplicating face below him was not George's but
Danny's. It was the face of his son.
  "Daddy--"
  And then the mallet crashed home, striking Danny right between the eyes,
closing them forever. And something somewhere seemed to be laughing--
  (! No !)

                             ***

 He came out of it standing naked over Danny's bed, his hands empty, his body
sheened with sweat. His final scream had only been in his mind. He voiced it
again, this time in a whisper.
 "No. No, Danny. Never."
 He went back to bed on legs that had turned to rubber. Wendy was sleeping
deeply. The clock on the nightstand said it was quarter to five. He lay
sleepless until seven, when Danny began to stir awake. Then he put his legs over
the edge of the bed and began to dress. It was time to go downstairs and check
the boiler.

  Danny awoke with a muffled gasp from a terrible dream. There had been an
explosion. A fire. The Overlook was burning up. He and his mommy were watching
it from the front lawn.
  Mommy had said: "Look, Danny, look at the hedges."
  He looked at them and they were all dead. Their leaves had turned a suffocant
brown. The tightly packed branches showed through like the skeletons of half-
dismembered corpses. And then his daddy had burst out of the Overlooks big
double doors, and he was burning like a torch. His clothes were in flames, his
skin had acquired a dark and sinister tan that was growing darker by the moment,
his hair was a burning bush.
  That was when he woke up, his throat tight with fear, his hands clutching at
the sheet and blankets. Had he screamed? He looked over at his mother. Wendy lay
on her side, the blankets up to her chin, a sheaf of straw-colored hair lying
against her cheek. She looked like a child herself. No, he hadn't screamed.
  Lying in bed, looking upward, the nightmare began to drain away. He had a
curious feeling that some great tragedy
  (fire? explosion?)
  had been averted by inches. He let his mind drift out, searching for his
daddy, and found him standing somewhere below. In the lobby. Danny pushed a
little harder, trying to get inside his father. It was not good. Because Daddy
was thinking about the Bad Thing. He was thinking how
  (good just one or two would be i don't care sun's over the yardarm somewhere
in the world remember how we used to say that al? gin and tonic bourbon with
just a dash of bitters scotch and soda rum and coke tweedledum and tweedledee a
drink for me and a drink for thee the martians have landed somewhere in the
world princeton or houston or stokely on carmichael some fucking place after all
tis the season and none of us are)
  (GET OUT OF HIS MIND, YOU LITTLE SHIT!)
  He recoiled in terror from that mental voice, his eyes widening, his hands
tightening into claws on the counterpane. It hadn't been the voice of his father
but a clever mimic. A voice he knew. Hoarse, brutal, yet underpointed with a
vacuous sort of humor.
  Was it so near, then?
  He threw the covers back and swung his feet out onto the floor. He kicked his
slippers out from under the bed and put them on. He went to the door and pulled
it open and hurried up to the main corridor, his slippered feet whispering on
the nap of the carpet runner. He turned the corner.
  There was a man on all fours halfway down the corridor, between him and the
stairs.
  Danny froze.
  The man looked up at him. His eyes were tiny and red. He was dressed in some
sort of silvery, spangled costume. A dog costume, Danny realized. Protruding
from the rump of this strange creation was a long and floppy tail with a puff on
the end. A zipper ran up the back of the costume to the neck. To the left of him
was a dog's or wolf's head, blank eyesockets above the muzzle, the mouth open in
a meaningless snarl that showed the rug's black and blue pattern between fangs
that appeared to be papier-mache.
  The man's mouth and chin and cheeks were smeared with blood.
  He began to growl at Danny. He was grinning, but the growl was real. It was
deep in his throat, a chilling primitive sound. Then he began to bark. His teeth
were also stained red. He began to crawl toward Danny, dragging his boneless
tail behind him. The costume dog's head lay unheeded on the carpet, glaring
vacantly over Danny's shoulder.
  "Let me by," Danny said.
  "I'm going to eat you, little boy," the dogman answered, and suddenly a
fusillade of barks came from his grinning mouth. They were human imitations, but
the savagery in them was real. The man's hair was dark, greased with sweat from
his confining costume. There was a mixture of scotch and champagne on his
breath.
  Danny flinched back but didn't run. "Let me by."
  "Not by the hair of my chinny-chin-chin," the dogman replied. His small red
eyes were fixed attentively on Danny's face. He continued to grin. "I'm going to
eat you up, little boy. And I think I'll start with your plump little cock."
  He began to prance skittishly forward, making little leaps and snarling.
  Danny's nerve broke. He fled back into the short hallway that led to their
quarters, looking back over his shoulder. There was a series of mixed howls and
barks and growls, broken by slurred mutterings and giggles.
  Danny stood in the hallway, trembling.
  "Get it up!" the drunken dogman cried out from around the corner. His voice
was both violent and despairing. "Get it up, Harry you bitch-bastard! I don't
care how many casinos and airlines and movie companies you own! I know what you
like in the privacy of your own h-home! Get it up! I'll huff. . . and I'll puff
. . . until Harry Derwent's all bloowwwwn down!" He ended with a long, chilling
howl that seemed to turn into a scream of rage and pain just before it dwindled
off.
  Danny turned apprehensively to the closed bedroom door at the end of the
hallway and walked quietly down to it. He opened it and poked his head through.
His mommy was sleeping in exactly the same position. No one was hearing this but
him.
  He closed the door softly and went back up to the intersection of their
corridor and the main hall, hoping the dogman would be gone, the way the blood
on the walls of the Presidential Suite had been gone. He peeked around the
corner carefully.
  The man in the dog costume was still there. He had put his head back on and
was now prancing on all fours by the stairwell, chasing his tail. He
occasionally leaped off the rug and came down making dog grunts in his throat.
  "Woof! Woof! Bowwowwow! Grrrrrr!"
  These sounds came hollowly out of the mask's stylized snarling mouth, and
among them were sounds that might have been sobs or laughter.
  Danny went back to the bedroom and sat down on his cot, covering his eyes with
his hands. The hotel was running things now. Maybe at first the things that had
happened had only been accidents. Maybe at first the things he had seen really
were like scary pictures that couldn't hurt him. But now the hotel was
controlling those things and they could hurt. The Overlook hadn't wanted him to
go to his father. That might spoil all the fun. So it had put the dogman in his
way, just as it had put the hedge animals between them and the road.
  But his daddy could come here. And sooner or later his daddy would.
  He began to cry, the tears rolling silently down his cheeks. It was too late.
They were going to die, all three of them, and when the Overlook opened next
late spring, they would be right here to greet the guests along with the rest of
the spooks. The woman in the tub. The dogman. The horrible dark thing that had
been in the cement tunnel. They would be--
  (Stop! Stop that now!)
  He knuckled the tears furiously from his eyes. He would try as hard as he
could to keep that from happening. Not to himself, not to his daddy and mommy.
He would try as hard as he could.
  He closed his eyes and sent his mind out in a high, hard crystal bolt.
             (!!! DICK PLEASE COME QUICK WE'RE IN BAD
                    TROUBLE DICK WE NEED)
  And suddenly, in the darkness behind his eyes the thing that chased him down
the Overlook's dark halls in his dreams was there, right there, a huge creature
dressed in white, its prehistoric club raised over its head:
  "I'll make you stop it! You goddam puppy! I'll make you stop it because I am
your FATHER!"
  "No!" He jerked back to the reality of the bedroom, his eyes wide and staring,
the screams tumbling helplessly from his mouth as his mother bolted awake,
clutching the sheet to her breasts.
 "No Daddy no no no--"
 And they both heard the vicious, descending swing of the invisible club,
cutting the air somewhere very close, then fading away to silence as he ran to
his mother and hugged her, trembling like a rabbit in a snare.
 The Overlook was not going to let him call Dick. That might spoil the fun,
too.
 They were alone.
 Outside the snow came harder, curtaining them off from the world.