The studio was filled with the rich odor of roses, and when the
light summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden there came
through the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more
delicate perfume of the pink-flowering thorn.

From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was
lying, smoking, as usual, innumerable cigarettes, Lord Henry Wotton
could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-colored
blossoms of the laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able
to bear the burden of a beauty so flame-like as theirs; and now and
then the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long
tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window,
producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of
those pallid jade-faced painters who, in an art that is necessarily
immobile, seek to convey the sense of swiftness and motion.  The sullen
murmur of the bees shouldering their way through the long unmown grass,
or circling with monotonous insistence round the black-crocketed spires
of the early June hollyhocks, seemed to make the stillness more
oppressive, and the dim roar of London was like the bourdon note of a
distant organ.

In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the
full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty,
and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist
himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago
caused, at the time, such public excitement, and gave rise to so many
strange conjectures.

As he looked at the gracious and comely form he had so skilfully
mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his face, and
seemed about to linger there.  But he suddenly started up, and, closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he sought to
imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he feared he
might awake.

"It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done," said
Lord Henry, languidly.  "You must certainly send it next year to the
Grosvenor.  The Academy is too large and too vulgar.  The Grosvenor is
the only place."

"I don't think I will send it anywhere," he answered, tossing his head
back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at
Oxford.  "No: I won't send it anywhere."

Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows, and looked at him in amazement
through the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful
whorls from his heavy opium-tainted cigarette.  "Not send it anywhere?
My dear fellow, why?  Have you any reason?  What odd chaps you painters
are!  You do anything in the world to gain a reputation. As soon as you
have one, you seem to want to throw it away.  It is silly of you, for
there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and
that is not being talked about.  A portrait like this would set you far
above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite jealous,
if old men are ever capable of any emotion."

"I know you will laugh at me," he replied, "but I really can't exhibit
it.  I have put too much of myself into it."

Lord Henry stretched his long legs out on the divan and shook with
laughter.

"Yes, I knew you would laugh; but it is quite true, all the same."

"Too much of yourself in it!  Upon my word, Basil, I didn't know you
were so vain; and I really can't see any resemblance between you, with
your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young
Adonis, who looks as if he was made of ivory and rose-leaves.  Why, my
dear Basil, he is a Narcissus, and you--well, of course you have an
intellectual expression, and all that.  But beauty, real beauty, ends
where an intellectual expression begins.  Intellect is in itself an
exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face.  The moment one
sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something
horrid.  Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions.
How perfectly hideous they are!  Except, of course, in the Church.  But
then in the Church they don't think.  A bishop keeps on saying at the
age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen,
and consequently he always looks absolutely delightful.  Your
mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but whose
picture really fascinates me, never thinks.  I feel quite sure of that.
He is a brainless, beautiful thing, who should be always here in winter
when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in summer when we
want something to chill our intelligence.  Don't flatter yourself,
Basil: you are not in the least like him."

"You don't understand me, Harry.  Of course I am not like him.  I know
that perfectly well.  Indeed, I should be sorry to look like him.  You
shrug your shoulders?  I am telling you the truth.  There is a fatality
about all physical and intellectual distinction, the sort of fatality
that seems to dog through history the faltering steps of kings.  It
is better not to be different from one's fellows. The ugly and the
stupid have the best of it in this world.  They can sit quietly and
gape at the play.  If they know nothing of victory, they are at least
spared the knowledge of defeat.  They live as we all should live,
undisturbed, indifferent, and without disquiet. They neither bring ruin
upon others nor ever receive it from alien hands.  Your rank and
wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they are,--my fame, whatever it may
be worth; Dorian Gray's good looks,--we will all suffer for what the
gods have given us, suffer terribly."

"Dorian Gray? is that his name?" said Lord Henry, walking across the
studio towards Basil Hallward.

"Yes; that is his name.  I didn't intend to tell it to you."

"But why not?"

"Oh, I can't explain.  When I like people immensely I never tell their
names to any one.  It seems like surrendering a part of them. You know
how I love secrecy.  It is the only thing that can make modern life
wonderful or mysterious to us.  The commonest thing is delightful if
one only hides it.  When I leave town I never tell my people where I am
going.  If I did, I would lose all my pleasure.  It is a silly habit, I
dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great deal of romance into
one's life.  I suppose you think me awfully foolish about it?"

"Not at all," answered Lord Henry, laying his hand upon his shoulder;
"not at all, my dear Basil.  You seem to forget that I am married, and
the one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception
necessary for both parties.  I never know where my wife is, and my wife
never knows what I am doing.  When we meet,--we do meet occasionally,
when we dine out together, or go down to the duke's,--we tell each
other the most absurd stories with the most serious faces.  My wife is
very good at it,--much better, in fact, than I am. She never gets
confused over her dates, and I always do.  But when she does find me
out, she makes no row at all.  I sometimes wish she would; but she
merely laughs at me."

"I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry," said Basil
Hallward, shaking his hand off, and strolling towards the door that led
into the garden.  "I believe that you are really a very good husband,
but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues. You are an
extraordinary fellow.  You never say a moral thing, and you never do a
wrong thing.  Your cynicism is simply a pose."

"Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose I know,"
cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the
garden together, and for a time they did not speak.

After a long pause Lord Henry pulled out his watch.  "I am afraid I
must be going, Basil," he murmured, "and before I go I insist on your
answering a question I put to you some time ago."

"What is that?" asked Basil Hallward, keeping his eyes fixed on the
ground.

"You know quite well."

"I do not, Harry."

"Well, I will tell you what it is."

"Please don't."

"I must.  I want you to explain to me why you won't exhibit Dorian
Gray's picture.  I want the real reason."

"I told you the real reason."

"No, you did not.  You said it was because there was too much of
yourself in it.  Now, that is childish."

"Harry," said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, "every
portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not
of the sitter.  The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion.  It is
not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on
the colored canvas, reveals himself.  The reason I will not exhibit
this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown with it the secret
of my own soul."

Lord Harry laughed.  "And what is that?" he asked.

"I will tell you," said Hallward; and an expression of perplexity came
over his face.

"I am all expectation, Basil," murmured his companion, looking at him.

"Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry," answered the young
painter; "and I am afraid you will hardly understand it.  Perhaps you
will hardly believe it."

Lord Henry smiled, and, leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy
from the grass, and examined it.  "I am quite sure I shall understand
it," he replied, gazing intently at the little golden white-feathered
disk, "and I can believe anything, provided that it is incredible."

The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy lilac
blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the languid
air.  A grasshopper began to chirrup in the grass, and a long thin
dragon-fly floated by on its brown gauze wings.  Lord Henry felt as if
he could hear Basil Hallward's heart beating, and he wondered what was
coming.

"Well, this is incredible," repeated Hallward, rather
bitterly,--"incredible to me at times.  I don't know what it means.
The story is simply this.  Two months ago I went to a crush at Lady
Brandon's. You know we poor painters have to show ourselves in society
from time to time, just to remind the public that we are not savages.
With an evening coat and a white tie, as you told me once, anybody,
even a stock-broker, can gain a reputation for being civilized.  Well,
after I had been in the room about ten minutes, talking to huge
overdressed dowagers and tedious Academicians, I suddenly became
conscious that some one was looking at me.  I turned half-way round,
and saw Dorian Gray for the first time.  When our eyes met, I felt that
I was growing pale.  A curious instinct of terror came over me.  I knew
that I had come face to face with some one whose mere personality was
so fascinating that, if I allowed it to do so, it would absorb my whole
nature, my whole soul, my very art itself.  I did not want any external
influence in my life.  You know yourself, Harry, how independent I am
by nature.  My father destined me for the army.  I insisted on
going to Oxford.  Then he made me enter my name at the Middle Temple.
Before I had eaten half a dozen dinners I gave up the Bar, and
announced my intention of becoming a painter.  I have always been my
own master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray.
Then--But I don't know how to explain it to you. Something seemed to
tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life.  I had
a strange feeling that Fate had in store for me exquisite joys and
exquisite sorrows.  I knew that if I spoke to Dorian I would become
absolutely devoted to him, and that I ought not to speak to him.  I
grew afraid, and turned to quit the room.  It was not conscience that
made me do so: it was cowardice.  I take no credit to myself for trying
to escape."

"Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil. Conscience
is the trade-name of the firm.  That is all."

"I don't believe that, Harry.  However, whatever was my motive,--and it
may have been pride, for I used to be very proud,--I certainly
struggled to the door.  There, of course, I stumbled against Lady
Brandon.  'You are not going to run away so soon, Mr. Hallward?' she
screamed out.  You know her shrill horrid voice?"

"Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty," said Lord Henry,
pulling the daisy to bits with his long, nervous fingers.

"I could not get rid of her.  She brought me up to Royalties, and
people with Stars and Garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras
and hooked noses.  She spoke of me as her dearest friend.  I had only
met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me.  I
believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at
least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the
nineteenth-century standard of immortality. Suddenly I found myself
face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely
stirred me.  We were quite close, almost touching.  Our eyes met again.
It was mad of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him.
Perhaps it was not so mad, after all.  It was simply inevitable.  We
would have spoken to each other without any introduction.  I am sure of
that.  Dorian told me so afterwards.  He, too, felt that we were
destined to know each other."

"And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man?  I know
she goes in for giving a rapid précis of all her guests.  I remember
her bringing me up to a most truculent and red-faced old gentleman
covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my ear, in a
tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to everybody in
the room, something like 'Sir Humpty Dumpty--you know--Afghan
frontier--Russian intrigues: very successful man--wife killed by an
elephant--quite inconsolable--wants to marry a beautiful American
widow--everybody does nowadays--hates Mr. Gladstone--but very much
interested in beetles: ask him what he thinks of Schouvaloff.'  I
simply fled.  I like to find out people for myself.  But poor Lady
Brandon treats her guests exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods.
She either explains them entirely away, or tells one everything about
them except what one wants to know.  But what did she say about Mr.
Dorian Gray?"

"Oh, she murmured, 'Charming boy--poor dear mother and I quite
inseparable--engaged to be married to the same man--I mean married on
the same day--how very silly of me!  Quite forget what he does--afraid
he--doesn't do anything--oh, yes, plays the piano--or is it the violin,
dear Mr. Gray?'  We could neither of us help laughing, and we became
friends at once."

"Laughter is not a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is the best
ending for one," said Lord Henry, plucking another daisy.

Hallward buried his face in his hands.  "You don't understand what
friendship is, Harry," he murmured,--"or what enmity is, for that
matter.  You like every one; that is to say, you are indifferent to
every one."

"How horribly unjust of you!" cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat back,
and looking up at the little clouds that were drifting across the
hollowed turquoise of the summer sky, like ravelled skeins of glossy
white silk.  "Yes; horribly unjust of you.  I make a great difference
between people.  I choose my friends for their good looks, my
acquaintances for their characters, and my enemies for their brains. A
man can't be too careful in the choice of his enemies.  I have not got
one who is a fool.  They are all men of some intellectual power, and
consequently they all appreciate me.  Is that very vain of me?  I think
it is rather vain."

"I should think it was, Harry.  But according to your category I must
be merely an acquaintance."

"My dear old Basil, you are much more than an acquaintance."

"And much less than a friend.  A sort of brother, I suppose?"

"Oh, brothers!  I don't care for brothers.  My elder brother won't die,
and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else."

"Harry!"

"My dear fellow, I am not quite serious.  But I can't help detesting my
relations.  I suppose it comes from the fact that we can't stand other
people having the same faults as ourselves.  I quite sympathize with
the rage of the English democracy against what they call the vices of
the upper classes.  They feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and
immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of
us makes an ass of himself he is poaching on their preserves. When poor
Southwark got into the Divorce Court, their indignation was quite
magnificent.  And yet I don't suppose that ten per cent of the lower
orders live correctly."

"I don't agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is
more, Harry, I don't believe you do either."

Lord Henry stroked his pointed brown beard, and tapped the toe of his
patent-leather boot with a tasselled malacca cane.  "How English you
are, Basil!  If one puts forward an idea to a real Englishman,--always
a rash thing to do,--he never dreams of considering whether the idea is
right or wrong.  The only thing he considers of any importance is
whether one believes it one's self.  Now, the value of an idea has
nothing whatsoever to do with the sincerity of the man who expresses
it.  Indeed, the probabilities are that the more insincere the man is,
the more purely intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it
will not be colored by either his wants, his desires, or his
prejudices.  However, I don't propose to discuss politics, sociology,
or metaphysics with you.  I like persons better than principles.  Tell
me more about Dorian Gray.  How often do you see him?"

"Every day.  I couldn't be happy if I didn't see him every day.  Of
course sometimes it is only for a few minutes.  But a few minutes with
somebody one worships mean a great deal."

"But you don't really worship him?"

"I do."

"How extraordinary!  I thought you would never care for anything but
your painting,--your art, I should say.  Art sounds better, doesn't it?"

"He is all my art to me now.  I sometimes think, Harry, that there are
only two eras of any importance in the history of the world.  The first
is the appearance of a new medium for art, and the second is the
appearance of a new personality for art also.  What the invention of
oil-painting was to the Venetians, the face of Antinoüs was to late
Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray will some day be to me.
It is not merely that I paint from him, draw from him, model from him.
Of course I have done all that.  He has stood as Paris in dainty armor,
and as Adonis with huntsman's cloak and polished boar-spear.  Crowned
with heavy lotus-blossoms, he has sat on the prow of Adrian's barge,
looking into the green, turbid Nile.  He has leaned over the still pool
of some Greek woodland, and seen in the water's silent silver the
wonder of his own beauty.  But he is much more to me than that.  I
won't tell you that I am dissatisfied with what I have done of him, or
that his beauty is such that art cannot express it.  There is nothing
that art cannot express, and I know that the work I have done since I
met Dorian Gray is good work, is the best work of my life.  But in some
curious way--I wonder will you understand me?--his personality has
suggested to me an entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of
style.  I see things differently, I think of them differently.  I can
now re-create life in a way that was hidden from me before.  'A dream
of form in days of thought,'--who is it who says that?  I forget; but
it is what Dorian Gray has been to me.  The merely visible presence of
this lad,--for he seems to me little more than a lad, though he is
really over twenty,--his merely visible presence,--ah!  I wonder can
you realize all that that means?  Unconsciously he defines for me the
lines of a fresh school, a school that is to have in itself all the
passion of the romantic spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that
is Greek. The harmony of soul and body,--how much that is!  We in our
madness have separated the two, and have invented a realism that is
bestial, an ideality that is void.  Harry!  Harry! if you only knew
what Dorian Gray is to me!  You remember that landscape of mine, for
which Agnew offered me such a huge price, but which I would not part
with? It is one of the best things I have ever done.  And why is it so?
Because, while I was painting it, Dorian Gray sat beside me."

"Basil, this is quite wonderful!  I must see Dorian Gray."  Hallward
got up from the seat, and walked up and down the garden.  After
some time he came back.  "You don't understand, Harry," he said.
"Dorian Gray is merely to me a motive in art.  He is never more present
in my work than when no image of him is there.  He is simply a
suggestion, as I have said, of a new manner.  I see him in the curves
of certain lines, in the loveliness and the subtleties of certain
colors.  That is all."

"Then why won't you exhibit his portrait?"

"Because I have put into it all the extraordinary romance of which, of
course, I have never dared to speak to him.  He knows nothing about it.
He will never know anything about it.  But the world might guess it;
and I will not bare my soul to their shallow, prying eyes. My heart
shall never be put under their microscope.  There is too much of myself
in the thing, Harry,--too much of myself!"

"Poets are not so scrupulous as you are.  They know how useful passion
is for publication.  Nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions."

"I hate them for it.  An artist should create beautiful things, but
should put nothing of his own life into them.  We live in an age when
men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of autobiography.  We
have lost the abstract sense of beauty.  If I live, I will show the
world what it is; and for that reason the world shall never see my
portrait of Dorian Gray."

"I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won't argue with you.  It is only
the intellectually lost who ever argue.  Tell me, is Dorian Gray very
fond of you?"

Hallward considered for a few moments.  "He likes me," he answered,
after a pause; "I know he likes me.  Of course I flatter him
dreadfully.  I find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I
know I shall be sorry for having said.  I give myself away.  As a rule,
he is charming to me, and we walk home together from the club arm in
arm, or sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things.  Now and then,
however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a real delight
in giving me pain.  Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away my whole
soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to put in his
coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a
summer's day."

"Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger.  Perhaps you will tire
sooner than he will.  It is a sad thing to think of, but there is no
doubt that Genius lasts longer than Beauty.  That accounts for the fact
that we all take such pains to over-educate ourselves.  In the wild
struggle for existence, we want to have something that endures, and so
we fill our minds with rubbish and facts, in the silly hope of keeping
our place.  The thoroughly well informed man,--that is the modern
ideal.  And the mind of the thoroughly well informed man is a dreadful
thing.  It is like a bric-à-brac shop, all monsters and dust, and
everything priced above its proper value.  I think you will tire first,
all the same.  Some day you will look at Gray, and he will seem to you
to be a little out of drawing, or you won't like his tone of color, or
something.  You will bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and
seriously think that he has behaved very badly to you. The next time he
calls, you will be perfectly cold and indifferent.  It will be a
great pity, for it will alter you.  The worst of having a romance is
that it leaves one so unromantic."

"Harry, don't talk like that.  As long as I live, the personality of
Dorian Gray will dominate me.  You can't feel what I feel.  You change
too often."

"Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it.  Those who are
faithful know only the pleasures of love: it is the faithless who know
love's tragedies."  And Lord Henry struck a light on a dainty silver
case, and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and
self-satisfied air, as if he had summed up life in a phrase.  There was
a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the ivy, and the blue cloud-shadows
chased themselves across the grass like swallows.  How pleasant it was
in the garden!  And how delightful other people's emotions were!--much
more delightful than their ideas, it seemed to him.  One's own soul,
and the passions of one's friends,--those were the fascinating things
in life.  He thought with pleasure of the tedious luncheon that he had
missed by staying so long with Basil Hallward.  Had he gone to his
aunt's, he would have been sure to meet Lord Goodbody there, and the
whole conversation would have been about the housing of the poor, and
the necessity for model lodging-houses. It was charming to have escaped
all that!  As he thought of his aunt, an idea seemed to strike him.  He
turned to Hallward, and said, "My dear fellow, I have just remembered."

"Remembered what, Harry?"

"Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray."

"Where was it?" asked Hallward, with a slight frown.

"Don't look so angry, Basil.  It was at my aunt's, Lady Agatha's. She
told me she had discovered a wonderful young man, who was going to help
her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray.  I am bound to
state that she never told me he was good-looking.  Women have no
appreciation of good looks.  At least, good women have not. She said
that he was very earnest, and had a beautiful nature.  I at once
pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horridly
freckled, and tramping about on huge feet.  I wish I had known it was
your friend."

"I am very glad you didn't, Harry."

"Why?"

"I don't want you to meet him."

"Mr. Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir," said the butler, coming into
the garden.

"You must introduce me now," cried Lord Henry, laughing.

Basil Hallward turned to the servant, who stood blinking in the
sunlight.  "Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker: I will be in in a few
moments."  The man bowed, and went up the walk.

Then he looked at Lord Henry.  "Dorian Gray is my dearest friend," he
said.  "He has a simple and a beautiful nature.  Your aunt was quite
right in what she said of him.  Don't spoil him for me.  Don't try to
influence him.  Your influence would be bad.  The world is wide, and
has many marvellous people in it.  Don't take away from me the one
person that makes life absolutely lovely to me, and that gives to my
art whatever wonder or charm it possesses.  Mind, Harry, I trust you."
He spoke very slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of him almost
against his will.

"What nonsense you talk!" said Lord Henry, smiling, and, taking
Hallward by the arm, he almost led him into the house.

One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a
luxurious arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry's house in
Curzon Street.  It was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high
panelled wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-colored frieze and
ceiling of raised plaster-work, and its brick-dust felt carpet strewn
with long-fringed silk Persian rugs.  On a tiny satinwood table stood a
statuette by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of "Les Cent Nouvelles,"
bound for Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve, and powdered with the gilt
daisies that the queen had selected for her device.  Some large blue
china jars, filled with parrot-tulips, were ranged on the mantel-shelf,
and through the small leaded panes of the window streamed the
apricot-colored light of a summer's day in London.

Lord Henry had not come in yet.  He was always late on principle, his
principle being that punctuality is the thief of time.  So the lad was
looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pages
of an elaborately-illustrated edition of "Manon Lescaut" that he had
found in one of the bookcases.  The formal monotonous ticking of the
Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him.  Once or twice he thought of going
away.

At last he heard a light step outside, and the door opened.  "How late
you are, Harry!" he murmured.

"I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr. Gray," said a woman's voice.

He glanced quickly round, and rose to his feet.  "I beg your pardon. I
thought--"

"You thought it was my husband.  It is only his wife.  You must let me
introduce myself.  I know you quite well by your photographs.  I think
my husband has got twenty-seven of them."

"Not twenty-seven, Lady Henry?"

"Well, twenty-six, then.  And I saw you with him the other night at the
Opera."  She laughed nervously, as she spoke, and watched him with her
vague forget-me-not eyes.  She was a curious woman, whose dresses
always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a
tempest.  She was always in love with somebody, and, as her passion was
never returned, she had kept all her illusions.  She tried to look
picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy.  Her name was
Victoria, and she had a perfect mania for going to church.

"That was at 'Lohengrin,' Lady Henry, I think?"

"Yes; it was at dear 'Lohengrin.'  I like Wagner's music better than
any other music.  It is so loud that one can talk the whole time,
without people hearing what one says.  That is a great advantage: don't
you think so, Mr. Gray?"

The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and her
fingers began to play with a long paper-knife.

Dorian smiled, and shook his head: "I am afraid I don't think so, Lady
Henry.  I never talk during music,--at least during good music. If one
hears bad music, it is one's duty to drown it by conversation."

"Ah! that is one of Harry's views, isn't it, Mr. Gray?  But you must
not think I don't like good music.  I adore it, but I am afraid of it.
It makes me too romantic.  I have simply worshipped pianists,--two at a
time, sometimes.  I don't know what it is about them. Perhaps it is
that they are foreigners.  They all are, aren't they? Even those that
are born in England become foreigners after a time, don't they?  It is
so clever of them, and such a compliment to art. Makes it quite
cosmopolitan, doesn't it?  You have never been to any of my parties,
have you, Mr. Gray?  You must come.  I can't afford orchids, but I
spare no expense in foreigners.  They make one's rooms look so
picturesque.  But here is Harry!--Harry, I came in to look for you, to
ask you something,--I forget what it was,--and I found Mr. Gray here.
We have had such a pleasant chat about music.  We have quite the same
views.  No; I think our views are quite different.  But he has been
most pleasant.  I am so glad I've seen him."

"I am charmed, my love, quite charmed," said Lord Henry, elevating his
dark crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused
smile.--"So sorry I am late, Dorian.  I went to look after a piece of
old brocade in Wardour Street, and had to bargain for hours for it.
Nowadays people know the price of everything, and the value of nothing."

"I am afraid I must be going," exclaimed Lady Henry, after an awkward
silence, with her silly sudden laugh.  "I have promised to drive with
the duchess.--Good-by, Mr. Gray.--Good-by, Harry.  You are dining out,
I suppose?  So am I.  Perhaps I shall see you at Lady Thornbury's."

"I dare say, my dear," said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind her,
as she flitted out of the room, looking like a bird-of-paradise that
had been out in the rain, and leaving a faint odor of patchouli behind
her.  Then he shook hands with Dorian Gray, lit a cigarette, and flung
himself down on the sofa.

"Never marry a woman with straw-colored hair, Dorian," he said,
after a few puffs.

"Why, Harry?"

"Because they are so sentimental."

"But I like sentimental people."

"Never marry at all, Dorian.  Men marry because they are tired; women,
because they are curious: both are disappointed."

"I don't think I am likely to marry, Harry.  I am too much in love.
That is one of your aphorisms.  I am putting it into practice, as I do
everything you say."

"Whom are you in love with?" said Lord Henry, looking at him with a
curious smile.

"With an actress," said Dorian Gray, blushing.

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.  "That is a rather common-place
début," he murmured.

"You would not say so if you saw her, Harry."

"Who is she?"

"Her name is Sibyl Vane."

"Never heard of her."

"No one has.  People will some day, however.  She is a genius."

"My dear boy, no woman is a genius: women are a decorative sex.  They
never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly.  They represent
the triumph of matter over mind, just as we men represent the triumph
of mind over morals.  There are only two kinds of women, the plain and
the colored.  The plain women are very useful.  If you want to gain a
reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down to
supper.  The other women are very charming.  They commit one mistake,
however.  They paint in order to try to look young.  Our grandmothers
painted in order to try to talk brilliantly.  Rouge and esprit used to
go together.  That has all gone out now.  As long as a woman can look
ten years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly satisfied.
As for conversation, there are only five women in London worth talking
to, and two of these can't be admitted into decent society.  However,
tell me about your genius.  How long have you known her?"

"About three weeks.  Not so much.  About two weeks and two days."

"How did you come across her?"

"I will tell you, Harry; but you mustn't be unsympathetic about it.
After all, it never would have happened if I had not met you.  You
filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life.  For days
after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins.  As I lounged
in the Park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one
who passed me, and wonder with a mad curiosity what sort of lives they
led.  Some of them fascinated me.  Others filled me with terror. There
was an exquisite poison in the air.  I had a passion for sensations.

"One evening about seven o'clock I determined to go out in search of
some adventure.  I felt that this gray, monstrous London of ours, with
its myriads of people, its splendid sinners, and its sordid sins, as
you once said, must have something in store for me.  I fancied a
thousand things.

"The mere danger gave me a sense of delight.  I remembered what you had
said to me on that wonderful night when we first dined together, about
the search for beauty being the poisonous secret of life.  I don't know
what I expected, but I went out, and wandered eastward, soon losing my
way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black, grassless squares.
About half-past eight I passed by a little third-rate theatre, with
great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills.  A hideous Jew, in the
most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, was standing at the
entrance, smoking a vile cigar.  He had greasy ringlets, and an
enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled shirt.  ''Ave a box,
my lord?' he said, when he saw me, and he took off his hat with an act
of gorgeous servility.  There was something about him, Harry, that
amused me.  He was such a monster.  You will laugh at me, I know, but I
really went in and paid a whole guinea for the stage-box.  To the
present day I can't make out why I did so; and yet if I hadn't!--my
dear Harry, if I hadn't, I would have missed the greatest romance of my
life.  I see you are laughing.  It is horrid of you!"

"I am not laughing, Dorian; at least I am not laughing at you.  But you
should not say the greatest romance of your life.  You should say the
first romance of your life.  You will always be loved, and you will
always be in love with love.  There are exquisite things in store for
you.  This is merely the beginning."

"Do you think my nature so shallow?" cried Dorian Gray, angrily.

"No; I think your nature so deep."

"How do you mean?"

"My dear boy, people who only love once in their lives are really
shallow people.  What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity, I
call either the lethargy of custom or the lack of imagination.
Faithlessness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the
intellectual life,--simply a confession of failure.  But I don't want
to interrupt you.  Go on with your story."

"Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a
vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face.  I looked out behind the
curtain, and surveyed the house.  It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids
and cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake.  The gallery and pit
were fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty,
and there was hardly a person in what I suppose they called the
dress-circle.  Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there
was a terrible consumption of nuts going on."

"It must have been just like the palmy days of the British Drama."

"Just like, I should fancy, and very horrid.  I began to wonder what on
earth I should do, when I caught sight of the play-bill.  What do you
think the play was, Harry?"

"I should think 'The Idiot Boy, or Dumb but Innocent.'  Our fathers
used to like that sort of piece, I believe.  The longer I live, Dorian,
the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is
not good enough for us.  In art, as in politics, les grand pères ont
toujours tort."

"This play was good enough for us, Harry.  It was 'Romeo and
Juliet.'  I must admit I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing
Shakespeare done in such a wretched hole of a place.  Still, I felt
interested, in a sort of way.  At any rate, I determined to wait for
the first act.  There was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a
young Jew who sat at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but at
last the drop-scene was drawn up, and the play began.  Romeo was a
stout elderly gentleman, with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy voice,
and a figure like a beer-barrel.  Mercutio was almost as bad.  He was
played by the low-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was
on most familiar terms with the pit.  They were as grotesque as the
scenery, and that looked as if it had come out of a pantomime of fifty
years ago.  But Juliet!  Harry, imagine a girl, hardly seventeen years
of age, with a little flower-like face, a small Greek head with plaited
coils of dark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion, lips
that were like the petals of a rose.  She was the loveliest thing I had
ever seen in my life.  You said to me once that pathos left you
unmoved, but that beauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears.
I tell you, Harry, I could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears
that came across me.  And her voice,--I never heard such a voice.  It
was very low at first, with deep mellow notes, that seemed to fall
singly upon one's ear.  Then it became a little louder, and sounded
like a flute or a distant hautbois.  In the garden-scene it had all the
tremulous ecstasy that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are
singing.  There were moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of
violins.  You know how a voice can stir one.  Your voice and the voice
of Sibyl Vane are two things that I shall never forget.  When I close
my eyes, I hear them, and each of them says something different.  I
don't know which to follow.  Why should I not love her?  Harry, I do
love her.  She is everything to me in life.  Night after night I go to
see her play. One evening she is Rosalind, and the next evening she is
Imogen.  I have seen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking
the poison from her lover's lips.  I have watched her wandering through
the forest of Arden, disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and
dainty cap.  She has been mad, and has come into the presence of a
guilty king, and given him rue to wear, and bitter herbs to taste of.
She has been innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have crushed her
reed-like throat.  I have seen her in every age and in every costume.
Ordinary women never appeal to one's imagination.  They are limited to
their century.  No glamour ever transfigures them.  One knows their
minds as easily as one knows their bonnets.  One can always find them.
There is no mystery in one of them.  They ride in the Park in the
morning, and chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon. They have their
stereotyped smile, and their fashionable manner. They are quite
obvious.  But an actress!  How different an actress is!  Why didn't you
tell me that the only thing worth loving is an actress?"

"Because I have loved so many of them, Dorian."

"Oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces."

"Don't run down dyed hair and painted faces.  There is an extraordinary
charm in them, sometimes."

"I wish now I had not told you about Sibyl Vane."

"You could not have helped telling me, Dorian.  All through your life
you will tell me everything you do."

"Yes, Harry, I believe that is true.  I cannot help telling you things.
You have a curious influence over me.  If I ever did a crime, I would
come and confide it to you.  You would understand me."

"People like you--the wilful sunbeams of life--don't commit crimes,
Dorian.  But I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same.  And
now tell me,--reach me the matches, like a good boy: thanks,--tell me,
what are your relations with Sibyl Vane?"

Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes.
"Harry, Sibyl Vane is sacred!"

"It is only the sacred things that are worth touching, Dorian," said
Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice.  "But why
should you be annoyed?  I suppose she will be yours some day.  When one
is in love, one always begins by deceiving one's self, and one always
ends by deceiving others.  That is what the world calls romance.  You
know her, at any rate, I suppose?"

"Of course I know her.  On the first night I was at the theatre, the
horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over,
and offered to bring me behind the scenes and introduce me to her.  I
was furious with him, and told him that Juliet had been dead for
hundreds of years, and that her body was lying in a marble tomb in
Verona.  I think, from his blank look of amazement, that he thought I
had taken too much champagne, or something."

"I am not surprised."

"I was not surprised either.  Then he asked me if I wrote for any of
the newspapers.  I told him I never even read them.  He seemed terribly
disappointed at that, and confided to me that all the dramatic critics
were in a conspiracy against him, and that they were all to be bought."

"I believe he was quite right there.  But, on the other hand, most of
them are not at all expensive."

"Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means.  By this time the
lights were being put out in the theatre, and I had to go.  He wanted
me to try some cigars which he strongly recommended.  I declined.  The
next night, of course, I arrived at the theatre again. When he saw me
he made me a low bow, and assured me that I was a patron of art.  He
was a most offensive brute, though he had an extraordinary passion for
Shakespeare.  He told me once, with an air of pride, that his three
bankruptcies were entirely due to the poet, whom he insisted on calling
'The Bard.'  He seemed to think it a distinction."

"It was a distinction, my dear Dorian,--a great distinction.  But when
did you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?"

"The third night.  She had been playing Rosalind.  I could not help
going round.  I had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at me;
at least I fancied that she had.  The old Jew was persistent.  He
seemed determined to bring me behind, so I consented.  It was curious
my not wanting to know her, wasn't it?"

"No; I don't think so."

"My dear Harry, why?"

"I will tell you some other time.  Now I want to know about the girl."

"Sibyl?  Oh, she was so shy, and so gentle.  There is something of a
child about her.  Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told
her what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious
of her power.  I think we were both rather nervous.  The old Jew stood
grinning at the door-way of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate
speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like
children.  He would insist on calling me 'My Lord,' so I had to assure
Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind.  She said quite simply to
me, 'You look more like a prince.'"

"Upon my word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments."

"You don't understand her, Harry.  She regarded me merely as a person
in a play.  She knows nothing of life.  She lives with her mother, a
faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta
dressing-wrapper on the first night, and who looks as if she had seen
better days."

"I know that look.  It always depresses me."

"The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did not interest
me."

"You were quite right.  There is always something infinitely mean about
other people's tragedies."

"Sibyl is the only thing I care about.  What is it to me where she came
from?  From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and
entirely divine.  I go to see her act every night of my life, and every
night she is more marvellous."

"That is the reason, I suppose, that you will never dine with me now. I
thought you must have some curious romance on hand.  You have; but it
is not quite what I expected."

"My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and I have
been to the Opera with you several times."

"You always come dreadfully late."

"Well, I can't help going to see Sibyl play, even if it is only for an
act.  I get hungry for her presence; and when I think of the wonderful
soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I am filled with
awe."

"You can dine with me to-night, Dorian, can't you?"

He shook his head.  "To-night she is Imogen," he answered, "and
tomorrow night she will be Juliet."

"When is she Sibyl Vane?"

"Never."

"I congratulate you."

"How horrid you are!  She is all the great heroines of the world in
one.  She is more than an individual.  You laugh, but I tell you she
has genius.  I love her, and I must make her love me.  You, who know
all the secrets of life, tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me! I
want to make Romeo jealous.  I want the dead lovers of the world
to hear our laughter, and grow sad.  I want a breath of our passion to
stir their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain.  My
God, Harry, how I worship her!"  He was walking up and down the room as
he spoke.  Hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks. He was terribly
excited.

Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure.  How different
he was now from the shy, frightened boy he had met in Basil Hallward's
studio!  His nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of
scarlet flame.  Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his Soul, and
Desire had come to meet it on the way.

"And what do you propose to do?" said Lord Henry, at last.

"I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her act.  I
have not the slightest fear of the result.  You won't be able to refuse
to recognize her genius.  Then we must get her out of the Jew's hands.
She is bound to him for three years--at least for two years and eight
months--from the present time.  I will have to pay him something, of
course.  When all that is settled, I will take a West-End theatre and
bring her out properly.  She will make the world as mad as she has made
me."

"Impossible, my dear boy!"

"Yes, she will.  She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in
her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me that it
is personalities, not principles, that move the age."

"Well, what night shall we go?"

"Let me see.  To-day is Tuesday.  Let us fix to-morrow.  She plays
Juliet to-morrow."

"All right.  The Bristol at eight o'clock; and I will get Basil."

"Not eight, Harry, please.  Half-past six.  We must be there before the
curtain rises.  You must see her in the first act, where she meets
Romeo."

"Half-past six!  What an hour!  It will be like having a meat-tea.
However, just as you wish.  Shall you see Basil between this and then?
Or shall I write to him?"

"Dear Basil!  I have not laid eyes on him for a week.  It is rather
horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful
frame, designed by himself, and, though I am a little jealous of it for
being a whole month younger than I am, I must admit that I delight in
it.  Perhaps you had better write to him.  I don't want to see him
alone.  He says things that annoy me."

Lord Henry smiled.  "He gives you good advice, I suppose.  People are
very fond of giving away what they need most themselves."

"You don't mean to say that Basil has got any passion or any romance in
him?"

"I don't know whether he has any passion, but he certainly has
romance," said Lord Henry, with an amused look in his eyes.  "Has he
never let you know that?"

"Never.  I must ask him about it.  I am rather surprised to hear it. He
is the best of fellows, but he seems to me to be just a bit of a
Philistine.  Since I have known you, Harry, I have discovered that."

"Basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into
his work.  The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his
prejudices, his principles, and his common sense.  The only artists I
have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists.  Good
artists give everything to their art, and consequently are perfectly
uninteresting in themselves.  A great poet, a really great poet, is the
most unpoetical of all creatures.  But inferior poets are absolutely
fascinating.  The worse their rhymes are, the more picturesque they
look.  The mere fact of having published a book of second-rate sonnets
makes a man quite irresistible.  He lives the poetry that he cannot
write.  The others write the poetry that they dare not realize."

"I wonder is that really so, Harry?" said Dorian Gray, putting some
perfume on his handkerchief out of a large gold-topped bottle that
stood on the table.  "It must be, if you say so.  And now I must be
off.  Imogen is waiting for me.  Don't forget about to-morrow.
Good-by."

As he left the room, Lord Henry's heavy eyelids drooped, and he began
to think.  Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as
Dorian Gray, and yet the lad's mad adoration of some one else caused
him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy.  He was pleased by
it.  It made him a more interesting study.  He had been always
enthralled by the methods of science, but the ordinary subject-matter
of science had seemed to him trivial and of no import.  And so he had
begun by vivisecting himself, as he had ended by vivisecting others.
Human life,--that appeared to him the one thing worth investigating.
There was nothing else of any value, compared to it.  It was true that
as one watched life in its curious crucible of pain and pleasure, one
could not wear over one's face a mask of glass, or keep the sulphurous
fumes from troubling the brain and making the imagination turbid with
monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams. There were poisons so subtle
that to know their properties one had to sicken of them.  There were
maladies so strange that one had to pass through them if one sought to
understand their nature.  And, yet, what a great reward one received!
How wonderful the whole world became to one!  To note the curious hard
logic of passion, and the emotional colored life of the intellect,--to
observe where they met, and where they separated, at what point they
became one, and at what point they were at discord,--there was a
delight in that!  What matter what the cost was?  One could never pay
too high a price for any sensation.

He was conscious--and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his
brown agate eyes--that it was through certain words of his, musical
words said with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray's soul had turned
to this white girl and bowed in worship before her.  To a large extent,
the lad was his own creation.  He had made him premature.  That was
something.  Ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its
secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were
revealed before the veil was drawn away. Sometimes this was the effect
of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately
with the passions and the intellect.  But now and then a complex
personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed,
in its way, a real work of art, Life having its elaborate
masterpieces, just as poetry has, or sculpture, or painting.

Yes, the lad was premature.  He was gathering his harvest while it was
yet spring.  The pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was
becoming self-conscious.  It was delightful to watch him.  With his
beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at.
It was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to end.  He was like
one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem
to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one's sense of beauty,
and whose wounds are like red roses.

Soul and body, body and soul--how mysterious they were!  There was
animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality.
The senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade.  Who could
say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began?
How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists!
And yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various
schools!  Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin?  Or was the
body really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought?  The separation of
spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter
was a mystery also.

He began to wonder whether we should ever make psychology so absolute a
science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us. As it
was, we always misunderstood ourselves, and rarely understood others.
Experience was of no ethical value.  It was merely the name we gave to
our mistakes.  Men had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of warning,
had claimed for it a certain moral efficacy in the formation of
character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow
and showed us what to avoid.  But there was no motive power in
experience.  It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself.
All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same
as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we
would do many times, and with joy.

It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by
which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and
certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to
promise rich and fruitful results.  His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane
was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest.  There was no
doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire
for new experiences; yet it was not a simple but rather a very complex
passion.  What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of
boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination,
changed into something that seemed to the boy himself to be remote from
sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous.  It was the
passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most
strongly over us.  Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we
were conscious.  It often happened that when we thought we were
experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.

While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the
door, and his valet entered, and reminded him it was time to dress
for dinner.  He got up and looked out into the street.  The sunset had
smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite.
The panes glowed like plates of heated metal.  The sky above was like a
faded rose.  He thought of Dorian Gray's young fiery-colored life, and
wondered how it was all going to end.

When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o'clock, he saw a telegram
lying on the hall-table.  He opened it and found it was from Dorian.
It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl Vane.

As he was sitting at breakfast next morning, Basil Hallward was
shown into the room.

"I am so glad I have found you, Dorian," he said, gravely.  "I called
last night, and they told me you were at the Opera.  Of course I knew
that was impossible.  But I wish you had left word where you had really
gone to.  I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy
might be followed by another.  I think you might have telegraphed for
me when you heard of it first.  I read of it quite by chance in a late
edition of the Globe, that I picked up at the club. I came here at
once, and was miserable at not finding you.  I can't tell you how
heart-broken I am about the whole thing.  I know what you must suffer.
But where were you?  Did you go down and see the girl's mother?  For a
moment I thought of following you there.  They gave the address in the
paper.  Somewhere in the Euston Road, isn't it?  But I was afraid of
intruding upon a sorrow that I could not lighten.  Poor woman!  What a
state she must be in!  And her only child, too!  What did she say about
it all?"

"My dear Basil, how do I know?" murmured Dorian, sipping some
pale-yellow wine from a delicate gold-beaded bubble of Venetian glass,
and looking dreadfully bored.  "I was at the Opera.  You should have
come on there.  I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry's sister, for the first
time. We were in her box.  She is perfectly charming; and Patti sang
divinely.  Don't talk about horrid subjects.  If one doesn't talk
about a thing, it has never happened.  It is simply expression, as
Harry says, that gives reality to things.  Tell me about yourself and
what you are painting."

"You went to the Opera?" said Hallward, speaking very slowly, and with
a strained touch of pain in his voice.  "You went to the Opera while
Sibyl Vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging?  You can talk to me
of other women being charming, and of Patti singing divinely, before
the girl you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in? Why, man,
there are horrors in store for that little white body of hers!"

"Stop, Basil!  I won't hear it!" cried Dorian, leaping to his feet.
"You must not tell me about things.  What is done is done.  What is
past is past."

"You call yesterday the past?"

"What has the actual lapse of time got to do with it?  It is only
shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion.  A man who
is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a
pleasure.  I don't want to be at the mercy of my emotions.  I want to
use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them."

"Dorian, this is horrible!  Something has changed you completely. You
look exactly the same wonderful boy who used to come down to my studio,
day after day, to sit for his picture.  But you were simple, natural,
and affectionate then.  You were the most unspoiled creature in the
whole world.  Now, I don't know what has come over you.  You talk as if
you had no heart, no pity in you.  It is all Harry's influence.  I see
that."

The lad flushed up, and, going to the window, looked out on the green,
flickering garden for a few moments.  "I owe a great deal to Harry,
Basil," he said, at last,--"more than I owe to you.  You only taught me
to be vain."

"Well, I am punished for that, Dorian,--or shall be some day."

"I don't know what you mean, Basil," he exclaimed, turning round.  "I
don't know what you want.  What do you want?"

"I want the Dorian Gray I used to know."

"Basil," said the lad, going over to him, and putting his hand on his
shoulder, "you have come too late.  Yesterday when I heard that Sibyl
Vane had killed herself--"

"Killed herself!  Good heavens! is there no doubt about that?" cried
Hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.

"My dear Basil!  Surely you don't think it was a vulgar accident?  Of
course she killed herself  It is one of the great romantic tragedies of
the age.  As a rule, people who act lead the most commonplace lives.
They are good husbands, or faithful wives, or something tedious.  You
know what I mean,--middle-class virtue, and all that kind of thing.
How different Sibyl was!  She lived her finest tragedy.  She was always
a heroine.  The last night she played--the night you saw her--she acted
badly because she had known the reality of love.  When she knew its
unreality, she died, as Juliet might have died.  She passed again into
the sphere of art.  There is something of the martyr about her.  Her
death has all the pathetic uselessness of martyrdom, all its
wasted beauty.  But, as I was saying, you must not think I have not
suffered.  If you had come in yesterday at a particular moment,--about
half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to six,--you would have found me
in tears.  Even Harry, who was here, who brought me the news, in fact,
had no idea what I was going through.  I suffered immensely, then it
passed away.  I cannot repeat an emotion.  No one can, except
sentimentalists.  And you are awfully unjust, Basil.  You come down
here to console me.  That is charming of you.  You find me consoled,
and you are furious.  How like a sympathetic person!  You remind me of
a story Harry told me about a certain philanthropist who spent twenty
years of his life in trying to get some grievance redressed, or some
unjust law altered,--I forget exactly what it was.  Finally he
succeeded, and nothing could exceed his disappointment.  He had
absolutely nothing to do, almost died of ennui, and became a confirmed
misanthrope.  And besides, my dear old Basil, if you really want to
console me, teach me rather to forget what has happened, or to see it
from a proper artistic point of view.  Was it not Gautier who used to
write about la consolation des arts?  I remember picking up a little
vellum-covered book in your studio one day and chancing on that
delightful phrase.  Well, I am not like that young man you told me of
when we were down at Marlowe together, the young man who used to say
that yellow satin could console one for all the miseries of life.  I
love beautiful things that one can touch and handle.  Old brocades,
green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories, exquisite surroundings,
luxury, pomp,--there is much to be got from all these.  But the
artistic temperament that they create, or at any rate reveal, is still
more to me.  To become the spectator of one's own life, as Harry says,
is to escape the suffering of life.  I know you are surprised at my
talking to you like this.  You have not realized how I have developed.
I was a school-boy when you knew me.  I am a man now.  I have new
passions, new thoughts, new ideas.  I am different, but you must not
like me less.  I am changed, but you must always be my friend.  Of
course I am very fond of Harry.  But I know that you are better than he
is. You are not stronger,--you are too much afraid of life,--but you
are better.  And how happy we used to be together!  Don't leave me,
Basil, and don't quarrel with me.  I am what I am.  There is nothing
more to be said."

Hallward felt strangely moved.  Rugged and straightforward as he was,
there was something in his nature that was purely feminine in its
tenderness.  The lad was infinitely dear to him, and his personality
had been the great turning-point in his art.  He could not bear the
idea of reproaching him any more.  After all, his indifference was
probably merely a mood that would pass away.  There was so much in him
that was good, so much in him that was noble.

"Well, Dorian," he said, at length, with a sad smile, "I won't speak to
you again about this horrible thing, after to-day.  I only trust your
name won't be mentioned in connection with it.  The inquest is to take
place this afternoon.  Have they summoned you?"

Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at
the mention of the word "inquest."  There was something so crude
and vulgar about everything of the kind.  "They don't know my name," he
answered.

"But surely she did?"

"Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentioned
to any one.  She told me once that they were all rather curious to
learn who I was, and that she invariably told them my name was Prince
Charming.  It was pretty of her.  You must do me a drawing of her,
Basil.  I should like to have something more of her than the memory of
a few kisses and some broken pathetic words."

"I will try and do something, Dorian, if it would please you.  But you
must come and sit to me yourself again.  I can't get on without you."

"I will never sit to you again, Basil.  It is impossible!" he
exclaimed, starting back.

Hallward stared at him, "My dear boy, what nonsense!" he cried.  "Do
you mean to say you don't like what I did of you?  Where is it?  Why
have you pulled the screen in front of it?  Let me look at it.  It is
the best thing I have ever painted.  Do take that screen away, Dorian.
It is simply horrid of your servant hiding my work like that.  I felt
the room looked different as I came in."

"My servant has nothing to do with it, Basil.  You don't imagine I let
him arrange my room for me?  He settles my flowers for me
sometimes,--that is all.  No; I did it myself.  The light was too
strong on the portrait."

"Too strong!  Impossible, my dear fellow!  It is an admirable place for
it.  Let me see it."  And Hallward walked towards the corner of the
room.

A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray's lips, and he rushed between
Hallward and the screen.  "Basil," he said, looking very pale, "you
must not look at it.  I don't wish you to."

"Not look at my own work! you are not serious.  Why shouldn't I look at
it?" exclaimed Hallward, laughing.

"If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honor I will never
speak to you again as long as I live.  I am quite serious.  I don't
offer any explanation, and you are not to ask for any.  But, remember,
if you touch this screen, everything is over between us."

Hallward was thunderstruck.  He looked at Dorian Gray in absolute
amazement.  He had never seen him like this before.  The lad was
absolutely pallid with rage.  His hands were clinched, and the pupils
of his eyes were like disks of blue fire.  He was trembling all over.

"Dorian!"

"Don't speak!"

"But what is the matter?  Of course I won't look at it if you don't
want me to," he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel, and going
over towards the window.  "But, really, it seems rather absurd that I
shouldn't see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it in
Paris in the autumn.  I shall probably have to give it another coat of
varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?"

"To exhibit it!  You want to exhibit it?" exclaimed Dorian Gray, a
strange sense of terror creeping over him.  Was the world going to
be shown his secret?  Were people to gape at the mystery of his life?
That was impossible.  Something--he did not know what--had to be done
at once.

"Yes: I don't suppose you will object to that.  Georges Petit is going
to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue de
Sèze, which will open the first week in October.  The portrait will
only be away a month.  I should think you could easily spare it for
that time.  In fact, you are sure to be out of town.  And if you hide
it always behind a screen, you can't care much about it."

Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead.  There were beads of
perspiration there.  He felt that he was on the brink of a horrible
danger.  "You told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it," he
said.  "Why have you changed your mind?  You people who go in for being
consistent have just as many moods as others.  The only difference is
that your moods are rather meaningless.  You can't have forgotten that
you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world would induce you
to send it to any exhibition.  You told Harry exactly the same thing."
He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into his eyes.  He
remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, half seriously and
half in jest, "If you want to have an interesting quarter of an hour,
get Basil to tell you why he won't exhibit your picture.  He told me
why he wouldn't, and it was a revelation to me."  Yes, perhaps Basil,
too, had his secret.  He would ask him and try.

"Basil," he said, coming over quite close, and looking him straight in
the face, "we have each of us a secret.  Let me know yours, and I will
tell you mine.  What was your reason for refusing to exhibit my
picture?"

Hallward shuddered in spite of himself.  "Dorian, if I told you, you
might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me. I
could not bear your doing either of those two things.  If you wish me
never to look at your picture again, I am content.  I have always you
to look at.  If you wish the best work I have ever done to be hidden
from the world, I am satisfied.  Your friendship is dearer to me than
any fame or reputation."

"No, Basil, you must tell me," murmured Dorian Gray.  "I think I have a
right to know."  His feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity
had taken its place.  He was determined to find out Basil Hallward's
mystery.

"Let us sit down, Dorian," said Hallward, looking pale and pained. "Let
us sit down.  I will sit in the shadow, and you shall sit in the
sunlight.  Our lives are like that.  Just answer me one question. Have
you noticed in the picture something that you did not like?--something
that probably at first did not strike you, but that revealed itself to
you suddenly?"

"Basil!" cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling
hands, and gazing at him with wild, startled eyes.

"I see you did.  Don't speak.  Wait till you hear what I have to say.
It is quite true that I have worshipped you with far more romance of
feeling than a man usually gives to a friend.  Somehow, I had never
loved a woman.  I suppose I never had time.  Perhaps, as Harry
says, a really 'grande passion' is the privilege of those who have
nothing to do, and that is the use of the idle classes in a country.
Well, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most
extraordinary influence over me.  I quite admit that I adored you
madly, extravagantly, absurdly.  I was jealous of every one to whom you
spoke.  I wanted to have you all to myself.  I was only happy when I
was with you.  When I was away from you, you were still present in my
art.  It was all wrong and foolish.  It is all wrong and foolish still.
Of course I never let you know anything about this.  It would have been
impossible.  You would not have understood it; I did not understand it
myself.  One day I determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you.  It
was to have been my masterpiece.  It is my masterpiece.  But, as I
worked at it, every flake and film of color seemed to me to reveal my
secret.  I grew afraid that the world would know of my idolatry.  I
felt, Dorian, that I had told too much. Then it was that I resolved
never to allow the picture to be exhibited.  You were a little annoyed;
but then you did not realize all that it meant to me.  Harry, to whom I
talked about it, laughed at me.  But I did not mind that.  When the
picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, I felt that I was right.
Well, after a few days the portrait left my studio, and as soon as I
had got rid of the intolerable fascination of its presence it seemed to
me that I had been foolish in imagining that I had said anything in it,
more than that you were extremely good-looking and that I could paint.
Even now I cannot help feeling that it is a mistake to think that the
passion one feels in creation is ever really shown in the work one
creates.  Art is more abstract than we fancy.  Form and color tell us
of form and color,--that is all.  It often seems to me that art
conceals the artist far more completely than it ever reveals him. And
so when I got this offer from Paris I determined to make your portrait
the principal thing in my exhibition.  It never occurred to me that you
would refuse.  I see now that you were right.  The picture must not be
shown.  You must not be angry with me, Dorian, for what I have told
you.  As I said to Harry, once, you are made to be worshipped."

Dorian Gray drew a long breath.  The color came back to his cheeks, and
a smile played about his lips.  The peril was over.  He was safe for
the time.  Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the young
man who had just made this strange confession to him.  He wondered if
he would ever be so dominated by the personality of a friend.  Lord
Harry had the charm of being very dangerous.  But that was all.  He was
too clever and too cynical to be really fond of. Would there ever be
some one who would fill him with a strange idolatry?  Was that one of
the things that life had in store?

"It is extraordinary to me, Dorian," said Hallward, "that you should
have seen this in the picture.  Did you really see it?"

"Of course I did."

"Well, you don't mind my looking at it now?"

Dorian shook his head.  "You must not ask me that, Basil.  I could not
possibly let you stand in front of that picture."

"You will some day, surely?"

"Never."

"Well, perhaps you are right.  And now good-by, Dorian.  You have been
the one person in my life of whom I have been really fond.  I don't
suppose I shall often see you again.  You don't know what it cost me to
tell you all that I have told you."

"My dear Basil," cried Dorian, "what have you told me?  Simply that you
felt that you liked me too much.  That is not even a compliment."

"It was not intended as a compliment.  It was a confession."

"A very disappointing one."

"Why, what did you expect, Dorian?  You didn't see anything else in the
picture, did you?  There was nothing else to see?"

"No: there was nothing else to see.  Why do you ask?  But you mustn't
talk about not meeting me again, or anything of that kind.  You and I
are friends, Basil, and we must always remain so."

"You have got Harry," said Hallward, sadly.

"Oh, Harry!" cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter.  "Harry spends
his days in saying what is incredible, and his evenings in doing what
is improbable.  Just the sort of life I would like to lead.  But still
I don't think I would go to Harry if I was in trouble.  I would sooner
go to you, Basil."

"But you won't sit to me again?"

"Impossible!"

"You spoil my life as an artist by refusing, Dorian.  No man comes
across two ideal things.  Few come across one."

"I can't explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again. I
will come and have tea with you.  That will be just as pleasant."

"Pleasanter for you, I am afraid," murmured Hallward, regretfully. "And
now good-by.  I am sorry you won't let me look at the picture once
again.  But that can't be helped.  I quite understand what you feel
about it."

As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to himself.  Poor Basil! how
little he knew of the true reason!  And how strange it was that,
instead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had
succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend! How
much that strange confession explained to him!  Basil's absurd fits of
jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his curious
reticences,--he understood them all now, and he felt sorry. There was
something tragic in a friendship so colored by romance.

He sighed, and touched the bell.  The portrait must be hidden away at
all costs.  He could not run such a risk of discovery again.  It had
been mad of him to have the thing remain, even for an hour, in a room
to which any of his friends had access.

For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the memory of
this book.  Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he never
sought to free himself from it.  He procured from Paris no less than
five large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in
different colors, so that they might suit his various moods and the
changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have
almost entirely lost control.  The hero, the wonderful young Parisian,
in whom the romantic temperament and the scientific temperament were so
strangely blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself.
And, indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his
own life, written before he had lived it.

In one point he was more fortunate than the book's fantastic hero. He
never knew--never, indeed, had any cause to know--that somewhat
grotesque dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still
water, which came upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was
occasioned by the sudden decay of a beauty that had once, apparently,
been so remarkable.  It was with an almost cruel joy--and perhaps in
nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruelty has its
place--that he used to read the latter part of the book, with its
really tragic, if somewhat over-emphasized, account of the sorrow and
despair of one who had himself lost what in others, and in the world,
he had most valued.

He, at any rate, had no cause to fear that.  The boyish beauty that had
so fascinated Basil Hallward, and many others besides him, seemed never
to leave him.  Even those who had heard the most evil things against
him (and from time to time strange rumors about his mode of life crept
through London and became the chatter of the clubs) could not believe
anything to his dishonor when they saw him.  He had always the look of
one who had kept himself unspotted from the world. Men who talked
grossly became silent when Dorian Gray entered the room.  There was
something in the purity of his face that rebuked them.  His mere
presence seemed to recall to them the innocence that they had
tarnished.  They wondered how one so charming and graceful as he was
could have escaped the stain of an age that was at once sordid and
sensuous.

He himself, on returning home from one of those mysterious and
prolonged absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among
those who were his friends, or thought that they were so, would creep
up-stairs to the locked room, open the door with the key that never
left him, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil
Hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on
the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him
from the polished glass.  The very sharpness of the contrast used to
quicken his sense of pleasure.  He grew more and more enamoured of his
own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul.
He would examine with minute care, and often with a monstrous and
terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead
or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes
which were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age.  He
would place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the
picture, and smile.  He mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.

There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in his own
delicately-scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the little
ill-famed tavern near the Docks, which, under an assumed name, and in
disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he
had brought upon his soul, with a pity that was all the more poignant
because it was purely selfish.  But moments such as these were rare.
That curiosity about life that, many years before, Lord Henry had first
stirred in him, as they sat together in the garden of their friend,
seemed to increase with gratification.  The more he knew, the more he
desired to know.  He had mad hungers that grew more ravenous as he fed
them.

Yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to
society.  Once or twice every month during the winter, and on each
Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the
world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the
day to charm his guests with the wonders of their art.  His little
dinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always assisted him, were
noted as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited,
as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, with
its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroidered
cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver. Indeed, there were many,
especially among the very young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw,
in Dorian Gray the true realization of a type of which they had often
dreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was to combine something of
the real culture of the scholar with all the grace and distinction and
perfect manner of a citizen of the world.  To them he seemed to belong
to those whom Dante describes as having sought to "make themselves
perfect by the worship of beauty." Like Gautier, he was one for whom
"the visible world existed."

And, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest, of the
arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation.
Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment
universal, and Dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert
the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for
him.  His mode of dressing, and the particular styles that he affected
from time to time, had their marked influence on the young exquisites
of the Mayfair balls and Pall Mall club windows, who copied him in
everything that he did, and tried to reproduce the accidental charm of
his graceful, though to him only half-serious, fopperies.

For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was almost
immediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed, a
subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the
London of his own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the author of the
"Satyricon" had once been, yet in his inmost heart he desired to be
something more than a mere arbiter elegantiarum, to be consulted on the
wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a necktie, or the conduct
of a cane.  He sought to elaborate some new scheme of life that would
have its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles and find in the
spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.

The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been
decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and
sensations that seem stronger than ourselves, and that we are conscious
of sharing with the less highly organized forms of existence.  But it
appeared to Dorian Gray that the true nature of the senses had never
been understood, and that they had remained savage and animal merely
because the world had sought to starve them into submission or to kill
them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of a new
spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be the
dominant characteristic.  As he looked back upon man moving through
History, he was haunted by a feeling of loss.  So much had been
surrendered! and to such little purpose!  There had been mad wilful
rejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and self-denial, whose
origin was fear, and whose result was a degradation infinitely more
terrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance,
they had sought to escape, Nature in her wonderful irony driving the
anchorite out to herd with the wild animals of the desert and giving to
the hermit the beasts of the field as his companions.

Yes, there was to be, as Lord Henry had prophesied, a new hedonism that
was to re-create life, and to save it from that harsh, uncomely
puritanism that is having, in our own day, its curious revival.  It was
to have its service of the intellect, certainly; yet it was never to
accept any theory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any
mode of passionate experience.  Its aim, indeed, was to be experience
itself, and not the fruits of experience, sweet or bitter as they might
be.  Of the asceticism that deadens the senses, as of the vulgar
profligacy that dulls them, it was to know nothing.  But it was to
teach man to concentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is
itself but a moment.

There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either
after one of those dreamless nights that make one almost enamoured of
death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when through
the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than reality
itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks in all grotesques,
and that lends to Gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, one
might fancy, especially the art of those whose minds have been troubled
with the malady of revery. Gradually white fingers creep through the
curtains, and they appear to tremble.  Black fantastic shadows crawl
into the corners of the room, and crouch there.  Outside, there is the
stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men going forth to
their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down from the hills,
and wandering round the silent house, as though it feared to wake the
sleepers.  Veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by
degrees the forms and colors of things are restored to them, and we
watch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern.  The wan
mirrors get back their mimic life.  The flameless tapers stand where we
have left them, and beside them lies the half-read book that we
had been studying, or the wired flower that we had worn at the ball, or
the letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too
often.  Nothing seems to us changed.  Out of the unreal shadows of the
night comes back the real life that we had known.  We have to resume it
where we had left off, and there steals over us a terrible sense of the
necessity for the continuance of energy in the same wearisome round of
stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our eyelids
might open some morning upon a world that had been re-fashioned anew
for our pleasure in the darkness, a world in which things would have
fresh shapes and colors, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world
in which the past would have little or no place, or survive, at any
rate, in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance
even of joy having its bitterness, and the memories of pleasure their
pain.

It was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to Dorian Gray
to be the true object, or among the true objects, of life; and in his
search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, and
possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, he
would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really
alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, and
then, having, as it were, caught their color and satisfied his
intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that
is not incompatible with a real ardor of temperament, and that indeed,
according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition of it.

It was rumored of him once that he was about to join the Roman Catholic
communion; and certainly the Roman ritual had always a great attraction
for him.  The daily sacrifice, more awful really than all the
sacrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superb
rejection of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicity
of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it
sought to symbolize.  He loved to kneel down on the cold marble
pavement, and with the priest, in his stiff flowered cope, slowly and
with white hands moving aside the veil of the tabernacle, and raising
aloft the jewelled lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid wafer
that at times, one would fain think, is indeed the "panis caelestis,"
the bread of angels, or, robed in the garments of the Passion of
Christ, breaking the Host into the chalice, and smiting his breast for
his sins.  The fuming censers, that the grave boys, in their lace and
scarlet, tossed into the air like great gilt flowers, had their subtle
fascination for him.  As he passed out, he used to look with wonder at
the black confessionals, and long to sit in the dim shadow of one of
them and listen to men and women whispering through the tarnished
grating the true story of their lives.

But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual
development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of
mistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable
for the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in which
there are no stars and the moon is in travail.  Mysticism, with its
marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle
antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for a
season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic
doctrines of the Darwinismus movement in Germany, and found a curious
pleasure in tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly
cell in the brain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the
conception of the absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical
conditions, morbid or healthy, normal or diseased.  Yet, as has been
said of him before, no theory of life seemed to him to be of any
importance compared with life itself.  He felt keenly conscious of how
barren all intellectual speculation is when separated from action and
experiment.  He knew that the senses, no less than the soul, have their
mysteries to reveal.

And so he would now study perfumes, and the secrets of their
manufacture, distilling heavily-scented oils, and burning odorous gums
from the East.  He saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not
its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their
true relations, wondering what there was in frankincense that made one
mystical, and in ambergris that stirred one's passions, and in violets
that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the
brain, and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often
to elaborate a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several
influences of sweet-smelling roots, and scented pollen-laden flowers,
of aromatic balms, and of dark and fragrant woods, of spikenard that
sickens, of hovenia that makes men mad, and of aloes that are said to
be able to expel melancholy from the soul.

At another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a long
latticed room, with a vermilion-and-gold ceiling and walls of
olive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad
gypsies tore wild music from little zithers, or grave yellow-shawled
Tunisians plucked at the strained strings of monstrous lutes, while
grinning negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums, or turbaned
Indians, crouching upon scarlet mats, blew through long pipes of reed
or brass, and charmed, or feigned to charm, great hooded snakes and
horrible horned adders.  The harsh intervals and shrill discords of
barbaric music stirred him at times when Schubert's grace, and Chopin's
beautiful sorrows, and the mighty harmonies of Beethoven himself, fell
unheeded on his ear.  He collected together from all parts of the world
the strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of
dead nations or among the few savage tribes that have survived contact
with Western civilizations, and loved to touch and try them.  He had
the mysterious juruparis of the Rio Negro Indians, that women are not
allowed to look at, and that even youths may not see till they have
been subjected to fasting and scourging, and the earthen jars of the
Peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, and flutes of human
bones such as Alfonso de Ovalle heard in Chili, and the sonorous green
stones that are found near Cuzco and give forth a note of singular
sweetness.  He had painted gourds filled with pebbles that rattled when
they were shaken; the long clarin of the Mexicans, into which the
performer does not blow, but through which he inhales the air; the
harsh turé of the Amazon tribes, that is sounded by the sentinels who
sit all day long in trees, and that can be heard, it is said, at a
distance of three leagues; the teponaztli, that has two vibrating
tongues of wood, and is beaten with sticks that are smeared with an
elastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; the yotl-bells of
the Aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; and a huge
cylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, like the
one that Bernal Diaz saw when he went with Cortes into the Mexican
temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a
description.  The fantastic character of these instruments fascinated
him, and he felt a curious delight in the thought that Art, like
Nature, has her monsters, things of bestial shape and with hideous
voices.  Yet, after some time, he wearied of them, and would sit in his
box at the Opera, either alone or with Lord Henry, listening in rapt
pleasure to "Tannhäuser," and seeing in that great work of art a
presentation of the tragedy of his own soul.

On another occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at a
costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress covered
with five hundred and sixty pearls.  He would often spend a whole day
settling and resettling in their cases the various stones that he had
collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that turns red by
lamplight, the cymophane with its wire-like line of silver, the
pistachio-colored peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes,
carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous four-rayed stars, flame-red
cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with their
alternate layers of ruby and sapphire.  He loved the red gold of the
sunstone, and the moonstone's pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow
of the milky opal.  He procured from Amsterdam three emeralds of
extraordinary size and richness of color, and had a turquoise de la
vieille roche that was the envy of all the connoisseurs.

He discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels.  In Alphonso's
"Clericalis Disciplina" a serpent was mentioned with eyes of real
jacinth, and in the romantic history of Alexander he was said to have
found snakes in the vale of Jordan "with collars of real emeralds
growing on their backs."  There was a gem in the brain of the dragon,
Philostratus told us, and "by the exhibition of golden letters and a
scarlet robe" the monster could be thrown into a magical sleep, and
slain.  According to the great alchemist Pierre de Boniface, the
diamond rendered a man invisible, and the agate of India made him
eloquent.  The cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth provoked
sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine.  The garnet cast
out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her color. The
selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus, that
discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids.
Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a
newly-killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison.  The
bezoar, that was found in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a charm
that could cure the plague.  In the nests of Arabian birds was the
aspilates, that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer from any
danger by fire.

The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand,
as the ceremony of his coronation.  The gates of the palace of John the
Priest were "made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snake
inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within." Over the gable
were "two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles," so that the
gold might shine by day, and the carbuncles by night.  In Lodge's
strange romance "A Margarite of America" it was stated that in the
chamber of Margarite were seen "all the chaste ladies of the world,
inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of chrysolites,
carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults."  Marco Polo had watched
the inhabitants of Zipangu place a rose-colored pearl in the mouth of
the dead.  A sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl that the diver
brought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned for seven
moons over his loss. When the Huns lured the king into the great pit,
he flung it away,--Procopius tells the story,--nor was it ever found
again, though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight of
gold pieces for it. The King of Malabar had shown a Venetian a rosary
of one hundred and four pearls, one for every god that he worshipped.

When the Duke de Valentinois, son of Alexander VI., visited Louis XII.
of France, his horse was loaded with gold leaves, according to
Brantôme, and his cap had double rows of rubies that threw out a great
light.  Charles of England had ridden in stirrups hung with three
hundred and twenty-one diamonds.  Richard II. had a coat, valued at
thirty thousand marks, which was covered with balas rubies. Hall
described Henry VIII., on his way to the Tower previous to his
coronation, as wearing "a jacket of raised gold, the placard
embroidered with diamonds and other rich stones, and a great bauderike
about his neck of large balasses."  The favorites of James I. wore
ear-rings of emeralds set in gold filigrane.  Edward II. gave to Piers
Gaveston a suit of red-gold armor studded with jacinths, and a collar
of gold roses set with turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap parsemé with
pearls.  Henry II. wore jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had
a hawk-glove set with twelve rubies and fifty-two great pearls.  The
ducal hat of Charles the Rash, the last Duke of Burgundy of his race,
was studded with sapphires and hung with pear-shaped pearls.

How exquisite life had once been!  How gorgeous in its pomp and
decoration!  Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.

Then he turned his attention to embroideries, and to the tapestries
that performed the office of frescos in the chill rooms of the Northern
nations of Europe.  As he investigated the subject,--and he always had
an extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment
in whatever he took up,--he was almost saddened by the reflection of
the ruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderful things.  He, at
any rate, had escaped that.  Summer followed summer, and the yellow
jonquils bloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the
story of their shame, but he was unchanged.  No winter marred his face
or stained his flower-like bloom.  How different it was with material
things!  Where had they gone to? Where was the great crocus-colored
robe, on which the gods fought against the giants, that had been worked
for Athena?  Where the huge velarium that Nero had stretched across the
Colosseum at Rome, on which were represented the starry sky, and Apollo
driving a chariot drawn by white gilt-reined steeds?  He longed to
see the curious table-napkins wrought for Elagabalus, on which were
displayed all the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast;
the mortuary cloth of King Chilperic, with its three hundred golden
bees; the fantastic robes that excited the indignation of the Bishop of
Pontus, and were figured with "lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests,
rocks, hunters,--all, in fact, that a painter can copy from nature;"
and the coat that Charles of Orleans once wore, on the sleeves of which
were embroidered the verses of a song beginning "Madame, je suis tout
joyeux," the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold
thread, and each note, a square shape in those days, formed with four
pearls.  He read of the room that was prepared at the palace at Rheims
for the use of Queen Joan of Burgundy, and was decorated with "thirteen
hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned with the
king's arms, and five hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings
were similarly ornamented with the arms of the queen, the whole worked
in gold."  Catherine de Médicis had a mourning-bed made for her of
black velvet powdered with crescents and suns.  Its curtains were of
damask, with leafy wreaths and garlands, figured upon a gold and silver
ground, and fringed along the edges with broideries of pearls, and it
stood in a room hung with rows of the queen's devices in cut black
velvet upon cloth of silver.  Louis XIV. had gold-embroidered
caryatides fifteen feet high in his apartment.  The state bed of
Sobieski, King of Poland, was made of Smyrna gold brocade embroidered
in turquoises with verses from the Koran.  Its supports were of silver
gilt, beautifully chased, and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled
medallions.  It had been taken from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and
the standard of Mohammed had stood under it.

And so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite
specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, getting
the dainty Delhi muslins, finely wrought, with gold-threat palmates,
and stitched over with iridescent beetles' wings; the Dacca gauzes,
that from their transparency are known in the East as "woven air," and
"running water," and "evening dew;" strange figured cloths from Java;
elaborate yellow Chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair
blue silks and wrought with fleurs de lys, birds, and images; veils of
lacis worked in Hungary point; Sicilian brocades, and stiff Spanish
velvets; Georgian work with its gilt coins, and Japanese Foukousas with
their green-toned golds and their marvellously-plumaged birds.

He had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeed
he had for everything connected with the service of the Church.  In the
long cedar chests that lined the west gallery of his house he had
stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of what is really the
raiment of the Bride of Christ, who must wear purple and jewels and
fine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is worn by
the suffering that she seeks for, and wounded by self-inflicted pain.
He had a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask, figured
with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set in six-petalled
formal blossoms, beyond which on either side was the pine-apple
device wrought in seed-pearls. The orphreys were divided into panels
representing scenes from the life of the Virgin, and the coronation of
the Virgin was figured in colored silks upon the hood.  This was
Italian work of the fifteenth century.  Another cope was of green
velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves, from
which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which were
picked out with silver thread and colored crystals.  The morse bore a
seraph's head in gold-thread raised work.  The orphreys were woven in a
diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with medallions of many
saints and martyrs, among whom was St. Sebastian.  He had chasubles,
also, of amber-colored silk, and blue silk and gold brocade, and yellow
silk damask and cloth of gold, figured with representations of the
Passion and Crucifixion of Christ, and embroidered with lions and
peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics of white satin and pink silk
damask, decorated with tulips and dolphins and fleurs de lys; altar
frontals of crimson velvet and blue linen; and many corporals,
chalice-veils, and sudaria.  In the mystic offices to which these
things were put there was something that quickened his imagination.

For these things, and everything that he collected in his lovely house,
were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he could
escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times to be
almost too great to be borne.  Upon the walls of the lonely locked room
where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with his own
hands the terrible portrait whose changing features showed him the real
degradation of his life, and had draped the purple-and-gold pall in
front of it as a curtain.  For weeks he would not go there, would
forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his light heart, his
wonderful joyousness, his passionate pleasure in mere existence.  Then,
suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, go down to
dreadful places near Blue Gate Fields, and stay there, day after day,
until he was driven away.  On his return he would sit in front of the
picture, sometimes loathing it and himself, but filled, at other times,
with that pride of rebellion that is half the fascination of sin, and
smiling, with secret pleasure, at the misshapen shadow that had to bear
the burden that should have been his own.

After a few years he could not endure to be long out of England, and
gave up the villa that he had shared at Trouville with Lord Henry, as
well as the little white walled-in house at Algiers where he had more
than once spent his winter.  He hated to be separated from the picture
that was such a part of his life, and he was also afraid that during
his absence some one might gain access to the room, in spite of the
elaborate bolts and bars that he had caused to be placed upon the door.

He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing.  It was true
that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness
of the face, its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learn
from that?  He would laugh at any one who tried to taunt him.  He had
not painted it.  What was it to him how vile and full of shame it
looked?  Even if he told them, would they believe it?

Yet he was afraid.  Sometimes when he was down at his great house
in Nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his own
rank who were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the
wanton luxury and gorgeous splendor of his mode of life, he would
suddenly leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door
had not been tampered with and that the picture was still there. What
if it should be stolen?  The mere thought made him cold with horror.
Surely the world would know his secret then.  Perhaps the world already
suspected it.

For, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who distrusted him.
He was blackballed at a West End club of which his birth and social
position fully entitled him to become a member, and on one occasion,
when he was brought by a friend into the smoking-room of the Carlton,
the Duke of Berwick and another gentleman got up in a marked manner and
went out.  Curious stories became current about him after he had passed
his twenty-fifth year.  It was said that he had been seen brawling with
foreign sailors in a low den in the distant parts of Whitechapel, and
that he consorted with thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of
their trade.  His extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he
used to reappear again in society, men would whisper to each other in
corners, or pass him with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching
eyes, as if they were determined to discover his secret.

Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no notice,
and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner, his
charming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youth
that seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answer
to the calumnies (for so they called them) that were circulated about
him.  It was remarked, however, that those who had been most intimate
with him appeared, after a time, to shun him.  Of all his friends, or
so-called friends, Lord Henry Wotton was the only one who remained
loyal to him.  Women who had wildly adored him, and for his sake had
braved all social censure and set convention at defiance, were seen to
grow pallid with shame or horror if Dorian Gray entered the room.

Yet these whispered scandals only lent him, in the eyes of many, his
strange and dangerous charm.  His great wealth was a certain element of
security.  Society, civilized society at least, is never very ready to
believe anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and
charming.  It feels instinctively that manners are of more importance
than morals, and the highest respectability is of less value in its
opinion than the possession of a good chef.  And, after all, it is a
very poor consolation to be told that the man who has given one a bad
dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private life.  Even the
cardinal virtues cannot atone for cold entrées, as Lord Henry remarked
once, in a discussion on the subject; and there is possibly a good deal
to be said for his view.  For the canons of good society are, or should
be, the same as the canons of art.  Form is absolutely essential to it.
It should have the dignity of a ceremony, as well as its unreality, and
should combine the insincere character of a romantic play with the wit
and beauty that make such plays charming.  Is insincerity such a
terrible thing? I think not.  It is merely a method by which we can
multiply our personalities.

Such, at any rate, was Dorian Gray's opinion.  He used to wonder at the
shallow psychology of those who conceive the Ego in man as a thing
simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence.  To him, man was a
being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex multiform
creature that bore within itself strange legacies of thought and
passion, and whose very flesh was tainted with the monstrous maladies
of the dead.  He loved to stroll through the gaunt cold picture-gallery
of his country-house and look at the various portraits of those whose
blood flowed in his veins.  Here was Philip Herbert, described by
Francis Osborne, in his "Memoires on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and
King James," as one who was "caressed by the court for his handsome
face, which kept him not long company."  Was it young Herbert's life
that he sometimes led?  Had some strange poisonous germ crept from body
to body till it had reached his own? Was it some dim sense of that
ruined grace that had made him so suddenly, and almost without cause,
give utterance, in Basil Hallward's studio, to that mad prayer that had
so changed his life? Here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled
surcoat, and gilt-edged ruff and wrist-bands, stood Sir Anthony
Sherard, with his silver-and-black armor piled at his feet.  What had
this man's legacy been?  Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples bequeathed
him some inheritance of sin and shame?  Were his own actions merely the
dreams that the dead man had not dared to realize?  Here, from the
fading canvas, smiled Lady Elizabeth Devereux, in her gauze hood, pearl
stomacher, and pink slashed sleeves.  A flower was in her right hand,
and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white and damask roses. On
a table by her side lay a mandolin and an apple.  There were large
green rosettes upon her little pointed shoes.  He knew her life, and
the strange stories that were told about her lovers.  Had he something
of her temperament in him?  Those oval heavy-lidded eyes seemed to look
curiously at him.  What of George Willoughby, with his powdered hair
and fantastic patches?  How evil he looked!  The face was saturnine and
swarthy, and the sensual lips seemed to be twisted with disdain.
Delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands that were so
overladen with rings.  He had been a macaroni of the eighteenth
century, and the friend, in his youth, of Lord Ferrars. What of the
second Lord Sherard, the companion of the Prince Regent in his wildest
days, and one of the witnesses at the secret marriage with Mrs.
Fitzherbert?  How proud and handsome he was, with his chestnut curls
and insolent pose!  What passions had he bequeathed? The world had
looked upon him as infamous.  He had led the orgies at Carlton House.
The star of the Garter glittered upon his breast. Beside him hung the
portrait of his wife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black.  Her blood,
also, stirred within him.  How curious it all seemed!

Yet one had ancestors in literature, as well as in one's own race,
nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly
with an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious.  There
were times when it seemed to Dorian Gray that the whole of history
was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in act
and circumstance, but as his imagination had created it for him, as it
had been in his brain and in his passions.  He felt that he had known
them all, those strange terrible figures that had passed across the
stage of the world and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of
wonder.  It seemed to him that in some mysterious way their lives had
been his own.

The hero of the dangerous novel that had so influenced his life had
himself had this curious fancy.  In a chapter of the book he tells how,
crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, as
Tiberius, in a garden at Capri, reading the shameful books of
Elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and the
flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as Caligula, had
caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables, and supped in
an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as Domitian, had
wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, looking round
with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger that was to end his
days, and sick with that ennui, that taedium vitae, that comes on those
to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a clear emerald at
the red shambles of the Circus, and then, in a litter of pearl and
purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the Street of
Pomegranates to a House of Gold, and heard men cry on Nero Caesar as he
passed by; and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face with colors, and
plied the distaff among the women, and brought the Moon from Carthage,
and given her in mystic marriage to the Sun.

Over and over again Dorian used to read this fantastic chapter, and the
chapter immediately following, in which the hero describes the curious
tapestries that he had had woven for him from Gustave Moreau's designs,
and on which were pictured the awful and beautiful forms of those whom
Vice and Blood and Weariness had made monstrous or mad: Filippo, Duke
of Milan, who slew his wife, and painted her lips with a scarlet
poison; Pietro Barbi, the Venetian, known as Paul the Second, who
sought in his vanity to assume the title of Formosus, and whose tiara,
valued at two hundred thousand florins, was bought at the price of a
terrible sin; Gian Maria Visconti, who used hounds to chase living men,
and whose murdered body was covered with roses by a harlot who had
loved him; the Borgia on his white horse, with Fratricide riding beside
him, and his mantle stained with the blood of Perotto; Pietro Riario,
the young Cardinal Archbishop of Florence, child and minion of Sixtus
IV., whose beauty was equalled only by his debauchery, and who received
Leonora of Aragon in a pavilion of white and crimson silk, filled with
nymphs and centaurs, and gilded a boy that he might serve her at the
feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose melancholy could be cured
only by the spectacle of death, and who had a passion for red blood, as
other men have for red wine,--the son of the Fiend, as was reported,
and one who had cheated his father at dice when gambling with him for
his own soul; Giambattista Cibo, who in mockery took the name of
Innocent, and into whose torpid veins the blood of three lads was
infused by a Jewish doctor; Sigismondo Malatesta, the lover of
Isotta, and the lord of Rimini, whose effigy was burned at Rome as the
enemy of God and man, who strangled Polyssena with a napkin, and gave
poison to Ginevra d'Este in a cup of emerald, and in honor of a
shameful passion built a pagan church for Christian worship; Charles
VI., who had so wildly adored his brother's wife that a leper had
warned him of the insanity that was coming on him, and who could only
be soothed by Saracen cards painted with the images of Love and Death
and Madness; and, in his trimmed jerkin and jewelled cap and
acanthus-like curls, Grifonetto Baglioni, who slew Astorre with his
bride, and Simonetto with his page, and whose comeliness was such that,
as he lay dying in the yellow piazza of Perugia, those who had hated
him could not choose but weep, and Atalanta, who had cursed him,
blessed him.

There was a horrible fascination in them all.  He saw them at night,
and they troubled his imagination in the day.  The Renaissance knew of
strange manners of poisoning,--poisoning by a helmet and a lighted
torch, by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander
and by an amber chain.  Dorian Gray had been poisoned by a book.  There
were moments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he
could realize his conception of the beautiful.